[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
hey folks
you caught me drinking is good to say
now with these earlier times we never
really have an excuse to be drinking for
the Q&A but today if it were just a
little bit later I'd be thinking about
it join you there those passionfruit
margaritas I made last night were pretty
good all right welcome back to the
thirty first Q&A livestream for the Dark
Horse podcast we are going to now match
our answers with your questions let's
see how we do all right so we're gonna
start with three that we didn't get to
from last time this one is in reference
to the black intellectual roundtable of
yesterday's chat it's curious that
religion was not mentioned which seems
like it could be a major contributing
factor no common moral framework or
commonality in which we mostly operate
under question mark each generation
seems less so and even anti religion so
it's kind of more of the comment than a
question but I thought it was worth
bringing up yep because it wasn't right
I mean no no one brought up religion I
know at least I know John Wood jr. to be
religious I don't I don't know all the
religious positions of everyone on that
panel but I know there's at least some
yeah yeah I would say this is a topic of
discussion in a lot of interesting
circles and I think we are going to have
to learn some sort of a new trick
there's what religion does traditionally
and there's what religion is
and the what religion is thing has
become too complex
and what religion does has been ignored
because the is part has become
incoherent so my suggestion would be we
need to figure out how to address the
needs that religion is targeted at
evolutionarily in some new way because
this is not a moment
you know starting a religion doesn't
make any sense taking any of the various
religions and trying to get everybody on
board that's not going to make sense so
in sum we need to have something that
galvanizes us and causes us to have the
expectation of of adhering to something
larger than ourselves and I think there
is something to be said for the fact
that we have seen society become
narcissistic and solipsistic in the
absence of a belief structure that would
tend to frustrate those instincts indeed
ok next question when arguing what's
behind black lives matter I often run
into what I call the mr. burns syndrome
where people say I sound like there's an
evil mastermind behind it though there
isn't it still sounds conspiracy serious
thoughts yeah that's the problem is that
you know it's in part the big lie if you
which is that because all that out what
that is well the big lie involves that
if you tell a gigantic lie frequently
and forcefully that people sort of
assume there must be truth to it because
it's hard to imagine that you would be
making up something so transparently
false and did this originate with Hitler
did he just sort of publicize it and
provide the world's most egregious
example yeah I'm I'm hello because I
believe there's some ambiguity about
that but it's certainly the context is
Hitlerian so I think we are all
experiencing this which is as you speak
about what's taking place you know
there's some sort of a horizontal
revolution taking place in every
institution that does sound
conspiratorial and preposterous and
there's a temptation to imagine that
well normally that doesn't happen and so
whatever comes next will be you know
we'll die down it will fizzle out it
will this it will that when in fact some
of us are saying no it won't because the
amount of power that this thing has
discovered it has is immense and it is
not normal for something that has
discovered that it is powerful to just
abandon that power so you know it will
change but we're headed somewhere very
dangerous because of what we have
discovered the process looks like and as
you say that it does for somebody who's
not paying attention to the analytics it
does sound like you're being alarmist so
all I would say that alarmist is
different from hypothesizing that
there's a deep dark force behind the
thing that's leading it right you know
that that could be one way to be
alarmist but it's not required by it and
I think it's a misunderstanding it's
sort of a it's a it's the comic book a
vacation of our understanding of what
heroes and villains look like that the
idea that you can't have bad things
happen in the world
absent a villain behind the scenes that
are rubbing his hands together and you
know making it all happen well you know
most most changes in history haven't
happened that way but those that have
certainly get a lot of play and they're
horrifying and in part it's easy to
track them because they appeal to our
also evolutionary desire for narrative
so when you have a human being who you
can blame and you can track what they
did and when they did it and what they
why they said they did it whether or not
you actually know why it's an easier
story to tell yeah that's true so there
is something about the complete absence
of leadership in this movement that
means at some level we are all reduced
to talking about a process yeah right
and talking about that process does you
know it's much harder to navigate rather
than being able to say well here's the
quote ya know and it's I mean it's part
of why it's been relatively easy for a
number of us now recently to say okay
white fragility is the book that's being
held up that that was written by a woman
and here's what's in the book and it's
nonsense and it's divisive and it's
dangerous but also you know the official
website of black lives matter is an
official website without anyone's name
on the masthead as far as I can tell but
it itself is changing right like so you
know a couple of
so it's ago I went to it and showed a
number of the you know the the the
pro-trans before pro-women sentiments
and the anti-nuclear family sentiments
and that thing has now been taken down
yep and before then before I before we
were doing these episodes there was
anti-israel sentiment which has long
since been taken down and so it's this
you know it's this moving target and
unless unless this is almost your
full-time job to sort of figure out what
it is that they're promoting and make
sure that you keep you know the screen
shot everything then there's cover
they've got cover by not having clear
leaders because everyone is flawed every
individual human being on the planet who
has ever lived who ever will live is
flawed will have made errors at some
point and therefore if you're really
really really trying you can find
something with which to disagree this
protects against that yeah no it does
and it means that you you know how does
one read the elimination of the attack
on the concept of the nuclear family
being eliminated from the website did
they realize how insane that was or have
they just decided that that draws too
much fire and so they've disappeared it
and do they still believe it which I
certainly assume type then that's the
thing a leader you know you could you
could ask them Frank Wright what
happened to that thing but as it is even
now if you say to somebody look I
support the idea of black life black
lives matter as we've said many times
black lives are undervalued black lives
matter is a statement that outlines that
that we would support under normal
circumstances however we can't support
the movement because the movement is
very closely associated with this
organization it doesn't disavow the
organization and so the organization has
a list of things on its website you send
somebody you say look actually they
they're against the nuclear family did
you know that right and somebody goes
and looks now and it's not there and it
looks like you've misunderstood right or
you're you know you're going on hearsay
when in fact it was right there well I
mean we we did show that on screen in
one of our episode I'm glad we did yeah
I'm glad we did it captures it so that
anybody who wonders whether or not
some of us are imagining things we'll
know that it was very definite or
engaging in hyperbole yep you know we
can we can then say you know when you
ask
has it been taken down because they have
seen that that's not a tenable position
nor is it consistent with the stated
beliefs of the black lives matter
movement or do they take it down because
it makes it more difficult to continue
to get recruits who are confused about
what the organization actually is I
certainly suspect strongly that it's the
second but that's that's you know that's
just interpretation on our part whereas
is it up you know is there something on
the website or not you can point to it
and say yeah it's right there yeah yeah
okay final question from episode 30 that
we wanted to get back to before
embarking on those from the last hour
I just watched Benjamin voices full
documentary of the Evergreen incident
how did you survive there as long as you
did
you want to take it off li you can start
just I thought it warranted a response
because we get we hit this a lot because
the stuff I mean Benjamin was there too
and Benjamin graduated and he learned a
tremendous amount and he also was
subjected to some crazy stuff inside his
classrooms we didn't that that we he was
subjected to some crazy stuff inside his
classrooms some of which we didn't
actually have any idea about until the
end because obviously in our classrooms
we weren't subjecting that kind of right
yet so we weren't subjected to it but
the key thing to understand is how
different the experience of an evergreen
professor can be from a normal professor
at some other college when your students
are taking one class full-time and
you're teaching one class full-time you
have this high level of engagement
that's involved in the college that
isn't connected to what's going on in
the wider College so we had actually an
extraordinarily positive experience
because by and large we had excellent
students our class's overflowed with
waiting list so we we had full rooms
full of people who were excited to have
professors who invested in them who
cared about them individually because
that's the experience they had in our
classrooms they tended to bounce between
my programs and your programs and
sometimes when we taught jointly we
would have even larger room full of
these people but basically the short
answer is we had a community of students
that was fantastic
and so our experience day to day was one
that was invigorating and it was just
simply fun and rewarding to go to work
and interact and you know only when
stuff bubbled up you know in faculty
meetings or in other such contexts did
you get the sense that something was
very deeply wrong which you know it was
it was light until Bridges showed up
right there were little hints but by and
large people still talked about the fact
that in order to teach you had to make
people uncomfortable that
uncomfortableness was we're learning
happened a core value of the institution
was teaching across significant
differences which meant that you didn't
have to look like the people in the
seats in order to convey things to them
and to learn from them you didn't need
to think like the
people in the seats in order to convey
things to them yeah look is easy and why
are we stuck here but more important is
think it's thinking basically all of the
elements of being human there was a
recognition that we were all going to be
different and that that didn't mean that
we couldn't have an educational
environment that functioned and then
those things in fact there was there was
not that much racial diversity at
Evergreen I mean like the entire Pacific
Northwest it was pretty white but there
was an incredible socio-economic
diversity and developmental history
diversity and you know the number of
students we had who were non-traditional
age was quite high in fact the average
age of students at Evergreen was 24 25
compared to 20 at most at most schools
number of students were paying their own
way who had no familial support
whatsoever was high people who were
veterans veterans who were single
mothers people who were coming back to
school after having raised their own
families people who have been home
school people have been on the skooled
there was a very there was a large
Indian population yeah the Native
Americans had in fact there were there
were a number of what like branch
campuses on reservations around the
state of Washington and we used to say
because neither of us thought that we
were going to become educators that
wasn't you know we were interested in
ideas and generating and spreading ideas
but the idea of doing it primarily to
and with undergraduates was never you
know the thing that we thought that we
were driven to do until we ended up at
Evergreen and found this model that
allowed so much in so much engagement
and really the back-and-forth and
playing with ideas and just you know
learning from one another that we
wouldn't have wanted to be anywhere else
it would be very very hard and limiting
and feel just impoverished to try to
teach and a standard you know 50 minutes
a week three times a week kind of
situation again like that it just it
just would not yeah wouldn't it wouldn't
create learning community well wouldn't
be satisfying as a job okay let us start
with questions from the last
do you think do you think it's possible
that the rise in perversion of
postplanner thought that is infecting
our major institutions and sense-making
apparatus is part of a calculated plan
by outside forces to destabilize the
u.s. from the inside out what it would
be easier for a foreign power to take
control in the midst of a civil war yes
it would yeah I would say a number of
things are true we've been watching this
school of thought gain power since the
90s
right and so it's very unlikely that
this was seeded by a foreign power with
intent that's it's too long a period of
time for it to have unfolded however it
doesn't mean especially in our modern
environment with algorithms and the like
it doesn't mean that somebody is not
taking opportunistic advantage of our
conflict over these things and
amplifying certain sentiments because it
is in their interest that we be devided
I mean the fact is divide-and-conquer is
well understood as a core strategy for
winning this is dividing us very finely
and in a way from which there's no
obvious recovery so it is almost certain
that our enemies will have noticed that
and that they will be attempting to
amplify it to what degree that's what's
going on I don't know but I will say my
discussion with the DHS officer that we
talked about in the first hour one of
the things he said several different
times was that he believed we were being
played that we were being pushed towards
racial conflict and that that was not
inherent to who we were that it was
somehow being imposed I asked him who he
thought was doing it he wasn't sure but
he had the he had the sense that that's
what was going on one hypothesis
implicit in this question might be that
the effectively postmodern takeover of
the Academy in the West and the u.s. in
particular could have been encouraged
facilitated with resources from
side and that's it that's a testable
hypothesis the idea that the rise of
these grievance Studies departments
Gender Studies and African American
Studies and Latin X studies and and all
of these things started I think it
started in the 90s but it really took
off sort of mid Otts
through through now and those
departments don't bring in any money and
in general what we've seen is a move
within universities a wave from you know
basically towards a business model in
which you are you are valued as faculty
and as a department on the basis of how
much external funds you bring in since a
large fraction of those funds then goes
to make the college run or the
university run so how were those
departments being paid for and I don't I
don't know the answer to that I don't
know how it was that so many such
departments got created and once they
were there then you they were they had
effectively already gamed the system
because now when you count up
departments and say oh we're gonna have
a vote and see who wants to pass this
measure across the entire campus well
now we've got you know twelve
departments that are there but
they already exist so I want to I I
don't know the answer to the question
but I do wonder if there's just a
perverse incentive around creating those
departments mmm that basically I mean
that's sorry but that's the high part
that's what we have been assuming right
that's and that's still what I think is
likely true but I actually occurs to me
that I have no idea right
the funding might be coming like where
did the funding come from given that
those departments cannot pay for
themselves well I don't know that they
cannot pay for themselves in the sense
that students it doesn't take very much
if you have six departments that
basically are it's a pseudo replication
of the idea that all there is is power
and that looks that way from the point
of view of women that looks that way
from the point of view of this group
that group one after the other it's all
the same point right the I don't my
guess would be that the faculty in those
departments are not expensive the space
to teach is not
offensive and that basically to the
extent that large numbers of students
think that they want to learn that what
they want to learn when they get to
college is about their own experience
you know close up with a microscope or
something like that that basically this
brings in tuition dollars gives people
something that it isn't hard for them to
get a degree in and so in a sense they
will make the trade
I could also I think I was disagreeing
with you up until that last point the
idea that these are effectively give me
degrees that if you if you get into some
school and then you decide I'm going to
major in one of those things I think
it's pretty hard to fill out yeah it's
right so you know without any rocks and
actually without each other either
neither rocks nor jocks but what you do
have are equally inexpensive to run by
your rubric departments things like
philosophy and literature that do
actually have standards at least they
used to and they still ought to because
we need the humanities those many
schools are are getting rid of those
departments they are slowly weaning you
know the the faculty way but the
difference is that it's harder and
harder to attract students to those
departments because it's just as hard to
make a living with a degree in
philosophy almost as it is to make a
degree with a living in Chicano Studies
but it's actually you're actually going
to have to do some work to get a degree
in philosophy and you know it shouldn't
be just as hard because philosophy is
real and you know we we we certainly we
know some remarkable philosophers who I
am quite sure when Christina Hoff
Sommers was on on a faculty somewhere
that she was actually educating people
and I believe that Peter Bogosian still
is when you know so long as he's allowed
to buy PSU as just two philosophers that
come to the off the top of my head
whereas I don't believe that students
emerge with much more than a sense of
their perennial victimhood from the
grievant Studies Fields right and so if
you're talking about you know fields
that are inexpensive to run the the
grievance Studies fields offer people I
mean basically by saying right up front
the only
accounts is lived-experience you're
effectively declaring that there's
nothing to learn and therefore let's
hear what you faced
yeah and it's it's it's a gimme for
students and for faculty too
I mean this is this is what lazy faculty
do they create a situation which they
have to do nothing and demonstrate that
they know nothing which would be hard
because in many cases they do know
nothing and and and they're all yeah
they get paid and the students get a
degree and it's a handshake in which
something of value in the market but if
no actual value in reality has been
exchanged yep
next question I'm just jumping all over
the place the pros suppressant Ovid
saves the lives of people who would have
died had they been infected before a
treatment became available when
hospitals are not at risk of being
overwhelmed by what mechanisms can
suppressing the spread save lives that's
a curious question yeah there's an ax
some there's an assumption in here that
I think isn't right but I'm not quite
sure what the assumption is maybe the
assumption is that the only benefit the
only way that lives are saved by
suppressing the spread is because you
don't end up in hospitals which are
overwhelmed and I I think I think I get
it if this working this goes back to the
very early discussions of flatten the
curve and herd immunity notice you
haven't heard much about hurt at me and
ID lately because sophisticated people
have largely given up on the idea that
this is the solution yeah so well and
and much of the world is flattening or
destroying the curve and we've decided
to try the second curve of even greater
magnitude right which ultimately I think
the question is predicated on the idea
that ultimately everybody gets it and if
the hospital isn't isn't overwhelmed
when you get there then when you get it
doesn't dictate whether or not you're
gonna survive and there's some truth in
that but what I would say is let's
imagine that a vaccine is possible we
don't know that it is not possible we
don't know that it is possible but it is
plausible that a vaccine can exist that
it will take time to get to one that
works
and from works we need to know that it
is safe enough to administer and so that
might be two three four years out how it
saves lives is what is the number of
people that we can prevent from getting
the disease through the date at which we
have some mechanism to prevent you from
ever getting the disease so that's one
thing and and we know that there is
there are morbidities that don't extend
all the way to death right that's that's
exactly where it's going is that the
other thing is that we are under
counting the massive harms that people
are experiencing even when they get it
and recover it's not everybody but it's
enough people and the harms are
substantial enough that we really need
to be thinking carefully about this and
then I would add one more thing to it
other countries have proven that they
have some different kind of wherewithal
in order to deal with this some of them
had easier puzzles to solve like New
Zealand but nonetheless they solved it
what are those countries going to do if
one by one the countries of the world
that have the wherewithal managed to
knock this thing out do you think
they're gonna let us across the border
no right we're gonna be able to travel
we're not we're not allowed across the
border now almost anywhere as I
mentioned one or two episodes ago and
that's not gonna change if we continue
doing this but I mean I'm talking
permanently if we don't beat this thing
are we ever gonna be allowed to travel
to New Zealand again probably not I mean
would you if you were New Zealand would
you allow if America had a problem
continuing and basically this thing
settled into a circulating cycle where
it was ever-present you wouldn't let
this thing back in no rational country
would and so this what does that mean
with respect to how the part of the
world that screwed this up is gonna be
allowed to interact with the part of the
world that figured out how to deal with
it so at some level let's rip the
band-aid off let us actually confront
this the way it needs to be confronted
to stamp it out we do not want to wait
for a vaccine we want to stamp it out
and it can be done it's harder now
because having screwed that process up
once we have quarantine fatigue or
whatever you would call it but
nonetheless it's only going to get
harder and the costs to us are only
going to get great area if you know
if we are the holdout amongst the first
world that can't figure out how to stamp
this out next question refers to
something that has come up before and I
still don't know exactly what it is
celebrate it maybe you know it Brett
what is your opinion on using a sort
ition to fill political positions
instead of our current method would you
like to see a successful unity 2020
start the conversation of moving towards
sortition thanks for taking the time to
do this show I don't know what sort
ition is I don't know what sort it is
either let us say that sortition I'm
wondering if it has something perhaps to
do with rank-choice voting it's it that
would be my guess yes I don't know so I
would say rank-choice voting is very
high on the list of topics discussed
inside the communities of people
interested in fixing the way our
political structure works so I don't
know about sortition have to look into
it but in terms of things that one can
do within the constitutional structure
we have there is a lot to be said for
for reorganizing how we count votes for
example in primaries etc so anyway look
for that you will hear more discussion
soon
I see confusion online about unity 2020s
goal of dealing with opportunity
hoarding and rent-seeking as some view
these as abstract assertions can you
provide specific examples of these
behaviors and practice and how the
current duopoly enables them so let me
before you answer that's a big question
and we're not going to spend you know
that that could be a whole hour but I
also I don't know if it was in the Q&A
last time I also actually stopped you at
one point and said let's just let's talk
about rent-seeking is because some
number of people are going to just think
rent and think you know cancel rent
which is one of the you know like
abolish the bully defund the police
cancel rent so that we have talked about
that recently as well and in an attempt
to to deal with the obvious problems of
always speaking in abstractions yep so
let us talk a little bit about rent
seeking as it exists and why Unity 2020
which does not have a platform nor does
it
aim to have a platform would address it
we have many instances in which we have
a solvable problem that persistently
remains unsolved
so our incredibly cruddy way of paying
for and allocating the right to health
care is a primary example why can we not
figure out a system in which your health
conditions are dealt with as a matter of
distributing the hazard over a risk pool
it's not complex what the problem is
that is to be solved nor is it complex
what the solution is the problem is that
we have a an industry in charge of
something which markets cannot be
allowed to do because they will
inevitably do it poorly so if you are in
the insurance game and I don't mean if
you are providing insurance which could
be done well but if you are in the
insurance game in the sense that you are
an insurance company in competition with
other insurance companies you will
inevitably discover that the way to win
the insurance game is to insure the
people who are at least likely to need
insurance and dissin sure the people who
are most likely to need the insurance so
the job of insurance which is to
neutralize the risks that we face when
somebody has done nothing wrong and has
gotten a cancer we can distribute the
cost of paying for the treatment of that
cancer across the entire population
basically you don't know whether you're
gonna get one or you're not going to get
one but we can all agree that I would
like it not to be ruinous if I get
cancer and so we can distribute the risk
across a large population but if my
insurance company is in the
profit-making business and it discovers
well actually we'd like to give the
insurance in case you get a cancer to
people who are least likely to get it
and we would like to dis insure the
people who are most likely to get it
because that's the way to enhance the
profits then what we end up doing is dis
insuring lots of people who are equally
deserving of being protected from this
hazard so in essence the solution
involves neutralizing the market forces
that surround insurance now who do you
think opposes that
people who are making a profit and
insurance why can't we solve that
problem why do they have a vote well
they have a vote because of the way that
things like lobbying influence policy so
persistently we are scratching our heads
and we have two parties that pretend
that there's some big disagreement on
how to make the system work right that's
gonna explain why they fail to solve a
decade after decade when in fact they
fail to solve a decade after decade
because they're both in the pockets of
these insurers whose racket involves
making money by preventing people from
having insurance who should have it
that's the racket right so that's
rent-seeking behavior the insurance
companies are providing some service
right but they are also getting a ton of
profit from something that is not only
not providing any useful service but it
is interrupting the service that they're
supposed to be providing so why would a
Unity 2020 ticket address that because
if you got Patriots in the White House
then what you would have are people who
had no incentive to keep the system
going and we're in a position to call it
out right there's an awful lot of power
in that it never happens the parties
arrange for that not to happen so that
we never solved the problem so that
their real constituents who include the
medical insurers never have to face the
terrible system that they've built so I
hope that explains it
next question what is the best method to
deliver funds to you where you retain
the maximum percentage this is about us
in particular you think probably PayPal
um probably pay pause that right mmm I
don't actually know what percentage
PayPal takes it depends patreon doesn't
take very much
well PayPal doesn't charge anything if
the payment is goods and is a
friends-and-family rather than goods and
services and the only reason that you
want goods and services the only
advantage to you is that it's insane
some consumer protections if you buy
something on ebay from somebody who's
fraudulent you have some protection that
comes from the fact that you paid them
with that service for which there's a
fee but there's no fee if you if you do
it friends and family so I think that's
that's
the answer beverage to the fact that
last I checked there's no fee at all if
you use that mechanism patreon is better
than YouTube YouTube takes 30 35 and 40
percent which is remarkable and it's
been noted here before and we are
actually beginning to think about
working with some of the wonderful
people who have offered their services
to develop some kind of an alternative
to super chat so people can ask
questions and we can actually retain a
higher proportion of of what you guys
are generously donating to us yep I
would point out that YouTube is a
perfect example of this rent-seeking
issue and it you know it has the full
complexity because YouTube is clearly
providing a real service you know it's
massive server firms that make all of
this possible allow you to deliver
videos anywhere in the world at high
quality yada yada yada but the family
don't even have you know a price list
anywhere like no one actually knows
exactly on any given video or any
different question exactly what
percentage they're going to take is it's
pretty low it's it's all opaque and you
know to the extent that there's an
appeal it's like you click appeal and
it's either granted or it isn't by some
you know judge in the sky or whatever
but yeah but the point is I think it's
known some fraction of what YouTube does
is providing a service and it takes a
cut and that's fair and then some
fraction of what it takes is pure
rent-seeking and you know I don't be
interesting to know what those two
numbers what those two percentages were
but a rest could have been done by the
police and did not require terror laws
agents were marked with police and DHS
badges the cops used unmarked the cops
use unmarked cars the tactic seems valid
at the escalation I understand the fear
for abuse but do you think it has
actually happened so this with regard to
the discussion last hour about NDAA yes
oh well NDAA but more specifically Trump
declaring a Tifa terrorist so I do
believe that there are abuses happening
clearly according to a standard
constitutional view because at the point
that the police take you off the street
they read you your rights then you are
under arrest at that moment and
taking you I can't say that police do
not take people into unmarked cars I
don't know enough about it but for one
thing there is going to typically be a
way to verify that a car is a police
vehicle if these are rented vehicles
right how do you know the difference
between somebody kidnapping you or the
government kidnapping you because
they've got their fingers crossed behind
their backs to you know obviate the
utility of the Constitution because oh
yeah Barack Obama signed the NDAA 2012
and you should read it really carefully
and consult the ACLU as to what it means
and you know yeah so anyway yes I do
think abuses are happening again I would
say I believe the meaning of it is
likely to be that they are signaling you
have triggered that mechanism right so
why would they take people put them in
the Federal Building and then release
them right there's something yes they're
engaged in abuses but there is something
symbolic about the abuses they are
engaged and they are alerting people you
triggered those provisions therefore
frankly anything could happen to you and
this is again exactly why I didn't want
terrorism invoked in this context
because now we are in this murky gray
area that many of us have been trying to
call attention to for well since 2012 so
next question is similar the feds don't
appear to seek to shut down the Portland
riots if they did they could have
arrested and incarcerated without bail
10 per night 500 rioters would now be
off the battlefield your thoughts there
is no question that mayor wheeler is
hamstringing the Portland police and
that he is doing so this is about the
feds in particular right it was feds
don't appear to seek to shut down port
riots
well okay so there's a question about
what the feds would be doing I mean I'm
not sure that the feds is being used
specifically here because the feds the
reason that the feds are involved has to
do with these federal buildings which
are inherently protected by federal
officers now feds could be brought in
under other circumstances and then
there's a question about
protections in all but it would have to
be the Portland police or the State
Police who were doing the arresting and
there is resistance there is local
political resistance to doing any such
thing because Portland is so heavily
Democratic and there is a basically it's
virtually signaling by our our city and
state government and that is the reason
that the federal government is on the
front lines that was the dog
so anyway really the right thing to
happen is for the the city and state
agencies to do their job and to protect
Portland from what has become a nightly
violent riot but the political will to
do it isn't there which is I mean and
this is frankly this is a Miss read by
the politicians currently in power they
they think that they are dependent on
these Yahoo's for their reelection and I
mean they must else else the destruction
this is going to cost so much money and
time and an already economically
devastated City because every city is I
kind of like a devastated because of
Cove in nineteen and just just
anecdotally I will say that when I go
out and have to ship something the UPS
or you know it if you PS or the post
office or just whenever I have an
interchange with someone that is brief
and no one's waiting behind me for the
interchange to end as quickly as
possible I am finding ways to ask how
are you doing what do you think what do
you think of what's going on and so far
to a person in which I am trying to not
betray anything about what I think
everyone whom I have spoken to across a
wide variety of demographics has said I
think there was reason to wish that our
policing was better and what has been
allowed to happen in the streets of
Portland is a travesty and it needs to
stop and I wonder where the leadership
is
I agree that that's where people would
likely be but the problem is the nature
of the movement is such that it puts
pressure on anybody who lets people vote
in private they do but so a I don't
think that this works like that where
people are going to say things publicly
and then privately feel very differently
and we that will be registered in the
vote because what's happening is people
are being placed in a position where
they have to agree to these these false
syllogisms and then having agreed to
them out of fear they then convince
themselves that that's what they believe
and so right or wrong mayor wheeler is
understanding the threat not to come
from the rioters but to come from the
people who with to signal that they also
believe that black lives matter which of
course is complex for all of the reasons
that we have said every time we've
discussed it right lots of people are
signaling that and you know it is
creating a power vacuum that the the
feds are now going to take advantage of
and you know basically we the citizens
of Portland have been left in a very
vulnerable position by that dynamic I
guess I'm just saying that I think
there's actually a tremendous number of
people who aren't who don't have their
feet being held to the fire by this by
the by the ideology inherent and what
the rioters are doing and and I think
frankly I think this is this is split
along pretty cleanly along class lines
and not at all perfectly but I think
most working-class people are watching
this saying what the actual hell like I
need to make a living I need I need to
have a job I need to have a downtown of
which I can I can walk and be and have
public transit that functions and this
is none of that and what is going on
with leadership and it's you know the
the look of these protests look it looks
just like it did on campuses its these
privileged kids who don't have meaning
in their lives and yes it doesn't look
like they're going to be able to make as
good a go of it as there
it's had and that is a tragedy and we
need to address that and that's what
occupy was about but this this isn't
mostly poor people or black people on
the streets protesting yeah on the other
hand you can see in the little episode
with with the majority report that you
know you and I have attempted to which
is which is a privileged white
organization I'm sure right this is like
an upper-middle class this is exactly
these people
well whatever it may be yeah you can see
that what we have tried to do is we have
tried to understand the complexity of
the situation and the complexity of the
situation is you do have violent rioters
in the streets nightly for some 50
nights in a row yeah there is a reason
that the protests are out there it has
to do with dysfunction in our system
that's real you have abuses by federal
powers you have a failure of leadership
at the local level so we have not carved
out a position on either side what is
now happening to us what we have is a an
Internet program that is now painting a
target on us that paints us as part of
the federal abuses right in a case where
we already have violence so they are
putting our family in actual danger
which means were we timid we would avoid
this topic so as not to be in that
danger right and others will detect that
they don't want to take these positions
because they don't want to be in danger
so the point is the room to have any
sort of nuanced position here is being
dried up by threats that are being
delivered in public okay you know I
agree with you the sentiment would be
there but I think people are also
detecting that there will be nobody
there to support them if they attempt to
take up a nuanced position like yes I'm
troubled by the undervaluing of black
lives but these riots have to stop well
I guess I mean we need me to move on but
I I guess I'm saying no it does exist
well I believe that a lot of people do
actually have this position and they
aren't people doing this they aren't
people with voice there's no way to find
them and
you happen to walk into a store where
they're working I mean he's these are
retail clerks I'm talking about really
and so that's a it's a weird totally
scattershot haphazard non you know non
survey survey but you know thinking of
this one woman in particular at a UPS
Store who no longer has her second job
at PSU where she was on the janitorial
staff
she's a she's a Latina woman you know
probably in her 30s
I don't probably she has family I don't
know I didn't yeah I wasn't able to
explore that much with her but I didn't
even bring it up in her case she just
started I said oh it's quiet in here
today she said yep at least I have this
job at least I have this job I don't
have my other one I kept it through
covet and now because it was in the
heart of the riots it's gone because
they won't open it up because it's not
safe for us to be there and she was she
was eager to talk I was the only one in
the store and she was she she just went
off and I thought yeah I grateful for
the job that she has and cannot believe
and you know and she and she said she
said in this conversation look it's not
that you know I this Latina woman
haven't experienced abuses and racism of
course I course she has no right um but
but not this way yeah this is not how
you do it you know at all oh boy
okay here we are
okay next three are actually a poem and
I'm going to try to read even though
they're all sort of stuck together and
then we'll do two more here and then
we'll move on to the next live stream
unity 2020 both both parties have
decided on a candidate that sucks if
only there was someone who could
out-compete these Schmucks I'd vote for
any Patriot with courage and a brain
corrupt septuagenarians logistically
insane what's that you say I have a
choice which stymies both their plans
and puts the Oval Office out of reach of
both their hands a ticket titled unity
on that my hat I'd hang I'd vote for
Yama Craven or perhaps McRaven yang the
old corrupt establishment will hate this
plan for sure and if we don't defeat
them their corruption will endure the
Articles of unity maybe our best
out and choosing the best way is what
elections are about that from the
militant moderate hell yeah I love it
that's a beautiful that's a really good
poetry that's really good I'm glad I
didn't mess it up yeah it's good Huff to
write poetry that somebody can read on
first reading and get the cadences and
everything right I did see it
during our break but but yeah it's it's
good good stuff thank you well done all
right two more questions here and then
we'll switch sorry to not get to so many
of the so many of the twenty thirty
dollar questions really enjoyed the
black intellectual roundtable will there
be more also I didn't fully understand
Brett's final recommendation about what
he thought they should focus on was it
corruption okay first of all there will
be more I'd like to do another round
table I'd certainly do another round
table with the same folks but there are
also other folks who weren't in on that
one who I think would be great as well
and you get a very different perspective
so anyway that's potentially something
that might happen in the future there
will certainly be follow-up
conversations with individuals who were
present in that roundtable all right let
me say before you address this the
second part this question that you're
gonna be : Hughes is invited you on his
podcast you're gonna be doing that soon
I think yes I believe this week um I was
gonna stick with Tsun Tsun yes it's
definitely soon okay soon so anyway yes
the conversations are continuing and I
look forward to it
I'm trying to remember how the
roundtable ended and what the questioner
is asking about but yes the there wasn't
enough room to explore unity 2020 in
that roundtable but the basic point was
we have a chronic problem the chronic
problem comes from the corruption of our
system which prevents normal democratic
mechanisms from addressing it in the
absence of those mechanisms people are
registering that they are frozen out of
well being and they're reacting to it in
a predictable way and the solution to
this is to put them back in a position
that policy serves their interests and
that we can continue advancing the ball
with respect to making the country truly
fair and inclusive
so my argument would be that's the only
thing that makes sense
voting for Biden doesn't make sense
because Biden is going to end up
amplifying he's going to be and the DNC
you're gonna cynically partner with this
movement which is going to amplify
racial tensions and it is going to
provide cover for the rent-seeking
elites that have corrupted policy for so
long so I do think it's the right
solution because in effect
the conclusion in that roundtable and
what you've heard us say here is that we
are in effect in effect being divided
which is to someone else's benefit
rather than being United and galvanized
for the purpose of making America
deliver on its promise why don't we hear
any talk about getting the money out of
politics we used to we used to talk
about that a lot and and it has not been
the main the main thrust for the last
few elections since was it oh boy a
mccain feingold is that the original it
is but I also think earlier in this
process it might have been as simple as
getting the money out of politics the
mechanisms through which corruption now
functions are many and varied so in
essence you need an anti-corruption set
of policies that deals with all of them
because any time you leave a leak that
leak is going to be used to enlarge
itself and ultimately will be returned
here so get the money out of politics is
I think a useful but inadequate version
of what we are now talking about which
is addressing all of the mechanisms of
corruption that prevent governance from
functioning okay one more here cuz it's
a it's a timely comment I just found out
that my long term girlfriend is pregnant
with our first here's the Unity 2020 and
to the conversations that will lead to a
better future for all congratulations
and here's to that indeed yep all right
skipping to the questions that have come
in this hour Zack have you drawn a line
I'm not seeing where
where we're supposed to be so while zach
is drawing a line I'm gonna go out back
and pull in one more question from last
livestream which is this in your last
stream Brett said that there is a kernel
of truth within critical theory
what is this kernel and what reason do
we have for believing it the kernel of
truth is this everything that you know
that you believe that you think that you
conclude that you surmise all of it has
come through perception right whether
you were perceiving words on a page that
reported an experiment that you were in
present at or you were running the
experiment and you saw the results and
you took the data whatever you know had
to come through your perceptual
apparatus because it has no other
mechanism for having gotten into your
mind so that creates a hazard because
perceptual apparatus is not there to
literally report the world it's there to
efficiently report the world in a way
that is useful most of the time right
so that has biases built into it which
we call heuristics those heuristics can
cause prejudices however that's sort of
the end of the kernel of truth right the
kernel of truth is bias is a problem
right down to the level of what your
eyes tell you is in front of you right
sometimes it's so unambiguous that
there's no problem right the tables here
in front of me I can see it it looks it
looks like an actual object even though
the rendering of it is in my mind
however there are lots of things that
aren't like that so the remedy is the
scientific method the purpose of the
scientific method is to allow you to
detect what is true in spite of the fact
that your perceptual apparatus doesn't
register it correctly on first pass
that's what the method is for and so to
the extent that critical theory proceeds
from the observation that bias is
potentially and everything that you
perceive the right answer to it is yes
that's why we need more and better
science to detect the places where we
have misunderstood the world and we can
understand them and that has you know
that's true about everything including
racial bias so the kernel of truth is
reception is dangerous because it has
heuristics built into it but then
critical theory immediately goes off the
rails by then arguing against a
scientific approach rather than for next
question are the values of equal rights
and worth in liberal philosophy only
metaphorically true or are there
objective underpinnings to them Jordan
Peterson presents individualism and
religious that is metaphoric tones yeah
you know I've been thinking about this
and I think you can see what's going on
in the question about a colorblind
society so the idea of a colorblind
society has of late been mocked because
it appears so the way it is marked is
that it is as if people who suggest that
a colorblind society is desirable have
said that they don't see race for
example right which is obviously an
insane claim the point though is
colorblind it does not mean you can't
see race it means that at the structural
level it plays no role so when you think
colorblind think of blind justice right
the statue with the blindfold over her
eyes and the and the scales and the
point is it's not like the court can't
know what your background is but your
background can have no implication for
whether or not you know for how the law
is applied right something has to be
criminal for all of us or for nobody and
you know this fails we've seen for
example during the crack epidemic that
crack and cocaine were punished very
differently and there was a different
racial makeup of the people likely to
get ensnared in legal proceedings over
using and trafficking in these things so
there are biases in the law but the idea
that the law aspires to be colorblind is
the right objective it has to be the
right objective there's no other decent
way we're going to be able to run
civilization so what I would say is it
is not that the claim is that there are
no differences obviously there's a
difference between men and women that
difference is rooted in deepest biology
right some of it is superficial some of
it is very deep however you know the
crime
of murder if you kill somebody the law
has to treat you similarly if you're
male or female right it doesn't have an
implication about what you know whether
or not you're entitled to take another
life so I don't think it's a claim about
us all being alike it is a claim about
how the system has to view us when it is
rewarding and punishing us yeah we've
touched on this before it's a it's a
conflation of equal means the same as
yeah you know or means identical to yeah
our human sisters who share dad's rich
ex more related than brothers a second
question if we switched in embryos why
for another why with the baby have
almost the same genotype and phenotype
as a twin brother with regular dads why
so the same question I don't quite get
what that first one our human sisters
who shared dad's rich ex more related
than brothers is is a fun one all right
so the idea is we've got 23 paired
chromosomes and at that 23rd position
the X which looks very much like all the
other 22 pairs is a much bigger
chromosome than the Y bigger and has
much more information even right it's
it's it's bigger by mass molecular mass
and it has more coding genes on it and
so that means that actually females have
larger genotypes that and have larger
genomes then then males and therefore
given that there's a larger genome to be
had with well there's a larger to nutria
it doesn't inherently make you more
related but it means that there's
because it depends on exactly what no no
I do I think the answer to the question
think the answer is yes but I'm not
actually I could just got stuck in the
nitty-gritty one math here I think we
can get there okay um tell me if I'm
wrong but me and you always do me so if
you are born if you're human or if you
are a eutherian mammals that thought
I'll cop to okay yes and you are you
were are therefore born with
your father's un-- recombined
x-chromosome because he doesn't have a
second X chromosome with which can the X
recombine actually that's an interesting
future itself I believe if you're female
and you have 2x but if you're male can
your X recombine it was a thing
something with which to recomm so if
you're a female you have an unrefined X
from your right there's no so you don't
have to say on recombined that's all
right I'm just saying it so it's clear
it's clear with a logic comes from so
the X is going to be one of your X's
will be unrecognizably then you have an
identical X which does drive up but the
Y is also one recombined so full
brothers also have identical was our two
sons of identical wise as well so nice
that's where I'm like trying to figure
out what the the larger genome but the X
that is a hundred percent inherited from
the dad for two full sisters as opposed
to a smaller genome but a Y which is a
smaller percentage of the genome that's
a hundred percent inherited from the
father by two four brothers which which
one is more fully related yeah no I
agree that's that's a confound and so
the problem here is this depends it
depends on how you do the calculation
because the Y being almost devoid of
genetic content intuitively seems like
it contributes less to the calculation
right having an identical Y that
contains almost nothing seems like it
fit contribute very little it's a few
important things in motion yeah just a
few right it's like the nuclear trigger
you know it yeah but anyway so I think
it's a different difficult question to
answer because you have to define your
terms and so how you calculate
relatedness you know as we've pointed
out in a prior live stream the fact that
you and a chimpanzee might be 98%
related but then we say that you're only
50% related to a full sibling
obviously suggests that those aren't the
same calculation so anyway it depends
define your terms and we can answer the
question although it would probably take
a little puzzling and a piece of paper
but yeah
do you track the second question here I
don't quite if we switch if we switched
in embryos why for another why would the
baby have almost the same genotype and
phenotype as a twin brother with regular
dads why oh yeah so I don't I don't know
what regular dad's why I think I'm not
sure what regularly inherited I think is
what it means so the question is if you
if you could without disturbing the
embryo and that's a if but if you could
pluck out a Y and substitute a different
human Y it would have almost no
implication for the embryo and the
developing creature because and you know
mind you this is subject as far as we
know where as far as we know but because
their reason isn't s skating a series of
events towards masculinization but the
way in which that masculinization occurs
doesn't seem to be highly variable
between y's right it's basically a
single signal that says go down this
pathway rather than that pathway and
probably it doesn't matter which male
you've got that signal from the point is
the content of what kind of male you're
gonna be is the result of things on the
autosomes that is to say the non-sex
chromosomes so yes i've my prediction
based on your question as this echo
would be almost die they would be
effectively identical twins cool george
knapp was just on Jerry I don't know who
George Knapp is to you so here's a fun
one for you the question continues do
you believe that we have been visited by
aliens why are why not no I don't
believe we've been visited bit by aliens
because there's not substantive
I will say you know I think you go down
this rabbit hole yeah and there's lots
of evidence of UFOs right lots of it
but UFO just means unidentified which
means you don't know whether it's your
own government playing game some other
government playing games
misunderstanding but well dude just
between you me and the small number of
people who may see this there is some
pretty interesting stuff that is now
being acknowledged about
for example military pilots who have
encountered phenomenon appears to defy a
natural explanation sure so what that's
- I think that's aliens having visited
the earth I do not I'm open to being
persuaded that it is no I mean I think
you know I said no right away but we got
a question a while ago about hmm I think
we got a question you know do you think
there's other intelligent life in the
universe and my sense is it has to have
evolved whether or not it still exists
now just in terms of statistical
likelihood and the conditions necessary
and all this for consciousness I think
it would be stunningly unlikely for
there not to be some other form of
intelligent life in the universe I am
more certain of that conclusion than I
am of the conclusion that there have
been no aliens visiting earth I think
it's really unlikely that aliens have
visited earth but there's a whole lot
that doesn't hinge on that like you know
we there's just a lot of stuff that we
can't know that we don't know and I also
have very little vested in the answer so
I'm happy to be cool I think you know
unless they were here to kill us no it's
uh well two things one I don't know what
you mean other intelligent life is there
intelligent life in the universe
I think it's it's probable well our dogs
in the room but with respect to the UFO
thing yeah if it was true I mean look if
it is true that aliens have visited the
earth then the evidence of that suggests
that they are actually actively visiting
right in other words these phenomena
that are difficult to explain through
normal mechanisms would suggest active
visitation if there was active is it a
ssin which I do not believe there is but
again that's waited that's all
that's less likely what that there is
active ongoing visitation well I mean
you know it depends what you mean you've
got where would they have come from
right not the solar system yeah
elsewheres right
so if they had arrived here from
somewhere over some very great distance
and we are seeing them in not only
historical times but you know with some
regularity we've see these phenomena
that are not explicable now again I
don't think that these are aliens from
elsewhere visiting the earth but if they
are I think the point is though that's
an ongoing something-or-other so here's
the question maybe if there's an ongoing
something or other okay wouldn't it be
worth our while to try to reach them and
get their help for example for example
were there aliens who were interested in
us for some reason
right yep right you know a Starman
waiting in the sky he'd like to come and
meet us but he thinks he'd blow our mind
well maybe the point is well we're
willing to have our minds blown right
because maybe they have the secret to
fusion power do you realize how much
better the planet would get if we could
get fusion power and govern it properly
right we could solve we could not only
halt global climate change we could
reverse it we could do all sorts if
they're here they probably do right well
exactly right we know it's possible so
if they're here right I'm not saying
they're here but I'm saying if we
thought they were here wouldn't the
thing to do be to try to talk them into
revealing themselves and helping us out
because we're in big trouble I'm not
kidding
it's a little bit like the right number
of lottery tickets to buy is one right
if you're wrong about the way the
universe works one lottery ticket allows
some force in the universe
- yeah solve your problems zero does not
said the guy who I think has never
bought a lottery ticket yeah right right
yeah nor has our dog nor by indeed okay
love to interview with dr. mu and I'm
preparing for my eventual root
resorption since I had braces when I was
in my teens what are your thoughts on
evolutionary optometry oh so this is
like this is a question we sort of asked
on whenever we were first talking about
this and I don't I don't really know
who's doing this work although we've
seen a few we've received a few emails
suggesting there might be some good
people out there and we've talked about
this a bit yeah it's long overdue I mean
the fact is as you know
okay there's there's words I mean but
the question presumes that it already
exists and we just don't we're not you
know in the conversation yet I mean
we've talked about it but I am there is
some discussion of it whether there's
anybody actively working in
ophthalmology who has an evolutionary
bent that is you know above laughable I
don't know I have yet to encounter them
if they exist I would love to know what
what they're up to because I do think we
are screwing up our eyes badly that we
could be doing vastly better and that
you know this is just one more way in
which we squander human potential by
pretending that all sorts of
evolutionary things aren't evolutionary
so we welcome it if it's out there maybe
we'll hear about it yeah I don't know
what the next question means sjw equals
pora Corey Yakuza sure I'm butchering
that in Japanese which means PC mafia
seems like a more apt name what do you
think PC mafia I just I just can't say
anything about what the Japanese means
so yep know what the connotations are I
yeah I think you know we're gonna have
to politely
sidestep that and say this is its own
phenomenon it's dangerous we would
welcome people within the phenomenon
waking up to the danger and attempting
to pursue actual justice in some way
that wasn't going to destroy everything
well both of you interview at Richard
Hart he's recently released a product
that is the dark horse of cryptocurrency
it's easy to use mmm that's welding Zak
you want to highlight that uh the one
I've got half assed highlighted I did
say when I was on Peter McCormick's
podcast his crypto podcast that I
thought the key thing was that crypto
remains too hard to use for it to catch
on and the analogy I used was the
difference between PGP and protonmail
right protonmail works because you don't
have to exchange keys and all it does it
seamlessly and so I was saying
the crypto needs that layer in order for
it to actually achieve its potential
which I quite believe so anyway maybe
maybe Richard Hart's got it yeah someone
has given a lot of money to ask to say I
would love to talk find me on Facebook
landon doc hmm
so oh no sack you want to highlight that
to the theoretical physicists dr7
Sabine Sabine Sabina Sabine Sabean
Hassan Felder would be a great interview
guest on the subject of philosophy of
science her recent book is titled lost
in math see also her blog in her YouTube
channel
I know a little bit about her for a long
time yeah yeah quite quite like her most
of the time there's some places where we
differ but anyway yeah I think she's a
fascinating fascinating person from my
perspective many of these postmodern
movements at their core are personal
traumas being acted out unconsciously on
a mass scale how do you combat something
but at its root is emotional and not
logical facts don't see him enough
thoughts yeah I agree with us and you
know we're I think we're often talking
past one another when well you know we
are simultaneously saying ok but you
know this thing is you know it has its
origins and post-modernism in these
traditions and then it was being taught
and indoctrinated at universities well
who are the people who were particularly
attracted to it some some of them were
actually interested in in inquiry and an
investigation of the world and the role
of bias in it I presume but because as
we already said because the main the
main product of such investigations is
your victim and you always will be a
victim and there's no escaping that that
will appeal to those who are feeling
themselves to be victims and have not
yet found any way to escape from it it's
a poor self-perpetuating but it does it
it our explanation of it from the point
of you know grievance studies and the
scholars and the scholarship and quotes
behind it does miss the individual
psychological level and the fact that we
have so many people who
are unregulated dysregulated do not have
any way to confront their own
psychologies and emotions and make real
connection and meaning in the world so I
would just point out the connection of
this to the rent-seeking
thing because yeah what you have is a
bunch of people making a profit by not
only failing to serve the interests of
people but in many cases actually
maiming them psychologically and
otherwise you know yes so you know this
happens from orthodontia through
pharmacological treatment of
psychological disorders you just have
all of these profit-making centers that
actually do a lot of harm to people and
have left them in many ways incapable of
doing what needs to be done which then
leaves them feeling betrayed and they're
not wrong that they've been betrayed but
they have misdiagnosed the nature of the
betrayal so yeah
let's deal with the rent-seeking okay
let's do who do three more sure okay are
there any schools left that resemble
what you loved about evergreen four
evergreen was actually was unique there
was there was no place else that did
that there are some schools that did you
know blog system you three weeks at a
time intensive with one group of
students and one faculty but being able
to be with the same group of people
full-time for a quarter or two quarters
an entire academic year and have that be
the extent of your academic work for the
year there's nothing else like that
actually and that there were a lot of
there are a lot of new pedagogical
structures that evergreen created when
it was formed in the late 60s early 70s
and some of them I think weren't as
important someone have been used
elsewhere but that thing right there
which was being dismantled in the last
year or two that we were there as well
was just it begun to be dismantled
really meant that there was no place
else
actually that was evergreen like in its
most unique and important
feature yep now if you were to try to
set something up that did that I would
say we learned a lot about what didn't
work about it too and while our
community was incredible and that
depended on the fact that actually we
were really interested in figuring out
what could be done with the freedom that
we had which was essentially told um
what I would suggest is if you were
going to set up that structure the key
thing you have to do is you've got to
find the people who actually are going
to run with the freedom and take it
somewhere useful from the point of view
of students evergreen brought in people
who you know it was very hard to figure
out who was going to be good at the job
of taking a blank canvas and turning it
into some new educational environment so
we got a lot of cruddy teachers but we
didn't have a mechanism to get rid of
them and so they accumulated and what
you want to do I think and we tried to
advocate for this for some years before
the end was bring people in
provisionally give them three years to
figure out whether or not they can make
the structure or work and if they can't
it's not personal but they don't they
shouldn't be in those spots and if you
accumulated people who inside of three
years could figure out how to make the
most of that freedom you'd have a great
faculty and I mean that normally existed
but in fact once you've gotten hired to
a tenure-track position you are almost
guaranteed to get tenured yep that's
true why is unity 2020 a better option
than pressuring our reps to pass
anti-corruption legislation because you
won't be able to pressure them because
the people who have successfully
corrupted the system will have vastly
more resources with which to exert
pressure in the other direction so the
reason to go after the White House is
that it has the what's called the bully
pulpit and the bully pulpit is a
powerful position with which to to drive
the money changers out as it were okay I
said we do through her questions this is
to be the last room but I just found one
down below this on a totally different
topic that we'll end with so get to more
now
argued with a person who said all luff
leaning people are parasites on humanity
similar to Dawkins on religion how do we
distinguish between evolved parasitic
relationships versus evolved adaptations
considering that both last a long time
okay this is tough because the question
is what level are you doing the analysis
in other words parasites are adaptive if
you analyze them at the parasite level
right at the level of the host they are
maladaptive so in some sense you have
adaptive phenomena are those phenomena
which are coherent and advanced their
own interests now you can have mind
virus stuff on a short timescale
circulate in human culture and how are
we to determine that well those
strategies will be self-defeating over
some period of time so for example to
the extent that this ideology we are
seeing in the street is very powerful it
is not stable and so it's going to
descend into a kind of madness you will
notice that it will not produce the
Utopia it's proposing it will produce
chaos right that tells us that it is not
an adaptive structure short term it is
gaining power but the structure it
creates with that power is going to be
authoritarian and it is going to produce
vastly more injustice than the system it
is replacing so you can take that as a
prediction okay last question you said
in Jamaica you studied reptiles I have
tons of animals thriving in my garden
any cool tips about these dewlap
flashing guys you could share I've heard
in the Caribbean there a case study for
convergent evolution so I scrolled
through and found the question about
lizards inside yes well I'll tell you
what I'll tell you a story so anyway I
was working with Bob in Jamaica rivers
Bob Traverse yeah the great evolutionary
biologist hi Bob if you're watching
anyway so we were capturing lizards and
we were counting things like scale
number to see how symmetrical they were
and we
measuring basically there's a question
of parasite load and desirability to
mates right some males have this flag on
their neck called a dewlap that they
show and the they challenge each other
you know you'll have one channel and one
log and one animal and another log and
they'll start flashing their dewlaps at
each other and it's like game on and
they'll wrestle him do all these things
and so anyway we were also we were
taking the animals and we were measuring
things about their symmetry and all of
that so I was very much in the habit so
so sorry so you were you were engaged in
the test of the Hamiltons up hypothesis
which is test that females are choosing
males based on their low parasite load
and their color in this case their
brightness will be an indicator in
inverse correlation with parasite load
the brighter the lizards the lower the
parasite load but you were also testing
questions of fluctuating asymmetry what
about females were interested in
particularly symmetrical like
bilaterally symmetrical males right
right thank you for the English English
translation it was vastly clearer than
what I was saying okay but anyway the
point was I was in the habit of grabbing
lizards and inspecting them and one day
I think Bob was getting ready to go out
for the evening or something and I came
into his room to talk to him and he
pointed me to the fact that there was an
animal on his dresser flashing its
dewlap to itself in the mirror and I
went to grab the anyone who's a at Dunn
do that because in some sense this
animal had come up against its ultimate
Mac I mean no matter how the guy is so
good he's so good so right and it would
just like no matter how many decimal
places you went they were dead even he
seems to predict by every moment yeah so
it's like that Marx Brothers routine
from duck soup oh yeah the mirror one
yeah
Beauty so anyway I did not collect the
lizard and we watched it for a good long
time angrily falls off a dresser
probably I did wonder briefly if it was
gonna catch fire
[Laughter]
but anyway yeah so I don't know that
there any tips other than yeah watch
them they're fascinating creatures their
fights are interesting oh I know I did
one of the more interesting things I did
while I was in Jamaica was I decided I
was going to watch one animal for 24
hours just to see what life looked like
and it was fascinating so consistent I
didn't know you did this 24 hours
without you going to sleep well the
animal went to sleep it went a sleep I
went to I went to bed took it because it
was clear wasn't gonna move till sunrise
so so anyway you know this was a male it
had sex three times in 24 hours which I
was very surprised by it so these
animals have two penises one on each
side and it alternated sides that's not
it that's not one animal trait that's
that's a squaw mate trip that's that's
all snakes and lizards have that yeah
but anyway the whole thing was pretty
fascinating yes okay so you pulled those
sort of a primatology move I think
primatologists work really really hard
because they basically have to put their
monkeys if they're watching monkeys to
bed at night and then get back before
the monkeys get up in the morning and
start heading across the forest in this
case you the the animal bedded down for
the night and like where do they sleep
what are they no hole in a hole okay and
so a I'd be curious if they go back to
the same hole every night they're
territorial mister did but when you came
back the next morning presumably it was
just was still in the hole and then you
waited until it emerged and it did
emerge and it was clear you hadn't
missed anything
yep unless something fancy was going on
inside the hole you never know you never
know can that could have been a portal
to another dimension oh yes all right I
think that's it
all right well thanks very much
everybody we'll be back on Tuesday a bit
later probably at the previous time like
3:30 or so mr. dick no on Tuesday all
right in the meantime check out Matt
Taibbi the black intellectual roundtable
if you haven't seen it
Mike Moo the most fascinating
orthodontist in the known universe
and look out for more content because
there's more coming all right be well
everyone
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]