[Music]
tell me the difference between
environmentalism and eco topia as you
see it okay
environmentalism is a word that's been
destroyed by all the wrong people doing
all the wrong things so essentially I
say we have a threat called climate
change climate changes all the time
but this type of climate change is
dramatic and it's got to be very costly
and it's gotta be millions of people
have to move around the planet and
probably across all other conflicts so
it is a major problem that needs to be
solved okay
our environmentalists concerned with
solving the climate change that no
they're not they're concerned with
plastic in the oceans they across or
anything you could see you know sense
but not necessarily anything
scientifically has to do with climate
change they're concerned with you
putting your plastic stuff and your
paper stuff and your metal stuff in the
right little boxes instead of getting a
damn machine intelligence that can sort
out your garbage for you so they'd be
concerned moralism they're concerned
with I'm walking in an extinction
rebellion parade in Stockholm looking
good so they could make it our little
point to be good people so they can you
know demonize people like you for being
evil people that's what they considered
they did say I was told I was evil today
on the social network someone directly I
don't know if they're being
tongue-in-cheek but they they were
suggesting I might be evil well you know
the people that went to war with Jordan
Peterson a couple years ago that we call
the social justice warriors are the very
same people now they take on the
environmentalist jeddah so when they're
finished with gender and the finish with
the general Orson they can't get
attention or money or whatever for that
war any longer they probably got to go
away to the environment right now and
they're all following a little Swedish
Virgin goddess called Greta I call the
great Tom Iguchi because she's very
popular people this year and she
probably will be out next year so we can
call the great Tamagotchi
you're nothing wrong with her okay but
if the wrong with the fallen something
one would follow so this with
environmentalists are constant
they've been located this round since
the 1970s they're not really concerned
with getting a proper education and
becoming engineers because engineers can
solve problems like climate change
demonstrators cannot kids who go on
school strikes will not solve anything
by having more engineers so get involved
with solar power wind power you know
stuff like that that will solve problems
for example the fact that solar power is
becoming affordable for millions of
people around the world today it's
because of the engineers in China it has
nothing to do with the environmentalist
in Europe in North America because they
haven't done they've done nothing
to solve the problems so we need more
engineers and engineers are not driven
by dystopian lacks efficient like
dystopian things like the world is going
down in flames we need an eschatology
we're all gonna die because of climate
change okay doesn't help anybody the
problem with something like Greenpeace
was that he was also dystopian
environmentalist just opium meaning
nobody really got engaged
that meant Greenpeace involved a few
hundred people who got obsessed with
whales and seals and which again had
nothing to do with climate change so if
you want to take the climate change
issue seriously you got to understand
what climate change is to begin with the
thing to do then when you take things
seriously you want to build a skyscraper
you know dream well then you first
though the proper grounding proper
basically so you understand what is
climate change
what does climate has been for the last
three million years where does that
happen what drive see when this had
become a problem how do you create a
planet that has a sustainable population
over ten billion units on it that's a
route that means for example even if
it's gonna take us another twenty
thousand years before we have an ice age
when the next ice age all right we
cannot we tell them to be people on this
planet so we need to fix those things
that means she created mission that
we're gonna create an e-coat opium
planet and it could talk it's a planet
that are sustainable climate which is
sustainable for human life on most of
the planet right so you can grow food
you can live there you can have your
cities and you can have the rural
landscape whatever you like
human beings can live on this planet
hopefully they can live and also enjoy
having quite a few other animals and
plants around them so we don't kill all
of them so you can have this sustainable
planet that anchor topia that's the
vision of a great planet compared to
what we have today that is utopian and
the great thing utopian this is
historically is a date got the engineers
on the move so a lot of guys wanna you
know get a proper education become
engineers you got not to save the world
that's an infantile desire but go out
build and cultivate cultivate the
ordinate yeah country you know the Tower
of Babel I would call this vision the
Garden of Babel because it's like the
Garden of Eden but it's like the tougher
Bible so let's say we cultivate the
entire planet cultivar a brilliant Latin
word meaning you cultivate everything we
need also control the planet sensors to
understand whether you understand
climate so you know what's going on and
you can be factual instead of guessing
what's going on to the planet and and
you know you know scare people with it
you can actually find out exactly what's
happening and putting the resources
where the most needed we might have to
put iron into the oceans and stuff like
that we might have to encourage millions
of farmers out there in the world to
somehow bury carbon we might have to
come up with all kinds of technological
solutions to avoid the current threat
but the only way to do that is to put an
army of Engineers out not more infantile
kids for themselves this is different
being equal to P anism
and environmentalism I'm not an
environmentalist
everything is environments anyway so
environmentalism doesn't say anything it
could tokenism stress that I believe
this planet can be turned into an echo
Tapia it probably needs to be done with
you you must gonna be around this planet
and I think we should have an armed
event give yourself they're trying to
figure out how we do that all right what
about all the other people who are
engineers well we need a lot of
engineers and I don't know what else we
need we need people who care all right
you take care of I'm just I'm just
anticipating maybe a critique of that
would be it sounds kind of just
materialistic right and you know we just
have to work
what about you know what about
philosophy or how do we think about that
how do we think about change is a
completely materialistic phenomenon
planet consists of whether it causes
some air water nature you know
temperature things like that
there's nothing spiritual about that at
all it's completely materialistic it's
not of interest that people say oh we
spiritually she could worship Mother
Earth well we've had enough of New Age
people like that they do nothing to help
they'll no help whatsoever this is a
construction problem that's all there is
to it so it's rather we should pull the
rug well the people who say well it's a
spiritual change that we need well
ariana grande thinks about that in here
latest traffic
it's the spirit to change we need to
save the planet well what has she done
you know it looks like her singing is
gonna change anything is it just sounds
good
who are you speaking of ariana grande
you know I get all my stink okay thank
you for being so human ariana grande is
the world's biggest pop star today oh
really okay that's order when I say
don't be bone on if I say don't be bona
to nineteen-year-old say don't be are on
my ground okay okay so no we do not need
pop singers we do not need school
strikers we do not need anymore
Instagram narcissists out there we need
to tell the guys there's social justice
warriors two three years ago that no no
you're not getting away with it this
time either
your infant's on our system it's do no
good to anybody meaning we need to
respond to that and say that hey wait a
second all of us who did encourage
people to study engineering and
technology you know which is the stuff
that I do so if you do that you done the
right thing for the past thirty years
instead of just thinking just because
you put your garbage in the wrong
garbage can you some are doing something
good no you haven't
mmm actually you it up being
worse plastic bags ago just might not
look very good but it's not a major
problem it's one aesthetic problem you
know it's not it's not a threat to the
climate there was even a Stanford
University come out the other day it
said that
climate change has already caused a lot
of problems in Africa and the action
literally wrote that in constant
Nigerian in Mauritania which which have
rather hot climates most year right
these countries were less productive
because of climate change
I'm just like no the climate hasn't
changed in Nigeria Nora Tanya yeah but
even worse a lot of children vast you
know populations but the climate hasn't
changed at all the climate has changed
in Greenland you know that's the only
place you know the Arctic is the only
place where we have a documented change
of climate due to climate change nothing
is really changed in Africa as things
all right now actually Africa is
probably gonna be greener and wetter in
the future then it's been so far
so so these guys who said it stand for
rice these papers should be fired
instantly I mean that's not real but
let's let's get the facts right if you
don't have the facts you do not have the
facts you cannot sit there and create a
mythology about climate change the more
time in Africa when there is snow climb
which is registered in that country that
is ridiculous
and if that's happening at Western
universities they're gonna have the
backlash of climate change deniers the
beginning you know that's only deserve
unfortunately though the climate change
deniers are also wrong you know they did
the wrong to climate change is real the
question is is it good or bad
well it depends on where you go I live
in Sweden Swedish the country's great
from you yeah that's right Canada too
right because Canada can support a large
population because it has lots of fresh
water so be great we should be nice for
the Russians because Russia is full of
places where actually more people come
to because it's gonna get greener and
warmer wetter we're gonna have enormous
problems in the western half of the
United States western half of the United
States northern China and the Middle
East
those are the three places on the planet
that are densely populated we've got a
big problem see climate change it was
next three to four years most climate
scientists agree on that probably
Australia's kind of a bad time to but
just Charlie doesn't really have any
people in it except for some aboriginals
is hardly anybody there but the Middle
East northern China and the western
United States they
need to watch out right now but where I
live in Scandinavia no standard Ava's
gonna be better off with a warmer wetter
greener planet so there you go there you
go
okay so stay nice for the Russians we
need Siberia that's a Cotto pian is
important it could tokenism is saying no
okay we need to move some Arabs to
Russia all right let's try to do that
then hmm that's a good tokenism I don't
ever hear environmentalists talk like
that they're just like no it's terrible
if anybody else to move no people have
always moved and well there seems to be
a like what I'm hearing from you now is
there's a confusion between the
spiritual issue and the actual you know
actual real facts you know people are
confusing those two things yeah in other
words people have people have taken this
on as a spiritual almost personal issue
right okay
mixes we know where I live we get
Germany mm-hmm Germany so full of car
factory started churning out leg 2 cars
yeah these electric cars have lithium
ion battery symptoms that takes about
seven years for a car like that to be on
the road to be better for the
environment than a diesel car cause
that's how much damage you do to the
environment by creating a lithium ion
battery and you put it inside a Mercedes
okay not only that but these are active
cars and they're rolling around on the
streets of Germany driven by electricity
that comes from coal plants that's even
worse than diesel today it's again the
fashion problem isn't it it's the
marketing nuclear power plants okay
nuclear power is absolutely essential if
you're Nico Tokyo because without
nuclear power would not have reliable
affordable electricity and we need tons
and tons of electricity for electricity
cars and everything else would do they
have centricity for example all the
world's laptops or smartphones and data
centers and all that
well all the stuff needs electricity
we're going electronic now the world's
become an electronic also the solutions
to the problems they could toe pian
solutions to the environment problems
with climate problems are all down to
cheap or reliable it twisted
not make cheap and reliable electricity
out of solar wind power
that won't happen but a biggest hope for
that to happen is fusion energy and then
she needs that efficient energy coming
in nuclear power plants but the next two
generations the Falcons are gonna use
the old few will reuse it again
so you recycle the you know the material
from the nuclear power plants meaning is
more affordable remove your weapons also
right yeah but you don't gonna have the
problems you use telling nuclear power
so you can't realistically solve the
current problems in the world without
tons of nuclear power now the Chinese
and the Indians get this so the Chinese
are building nuclear power plants the
English I even build in thorium plants
in addition to the Iranian plants so in
there will also tons on your nuclear
power plants the reason for that is that
Chinese and Indian people are a quart
opium they're not environmentalist they
picked opium because they realized oh my
god the Tibet is gonna melt and the
Himalayas gonna melt and if the Tibetan
Himalaya melt China and India would be
wiped out so you need Tibet with snow in
it
Terron China you need him alive and so
in it Tehran India otherwise there's no
Ganga put tron dance again the one who
you're gonna have the rivers that make
China need you do what they are which is
countries of a billion people each then
you need to keep the snow in the
mountains that motivates these guys to
build tons of nuclear power plants is
anything like that happening in North
America and Europe no because we got the
damn environmentalists in the way and
they say no nuclear power well then you
have coal power instead and then you
burn trongsa fossil fuel which is what
American German you're doing at the
moment
and that's not gonna helps if you if you
if you take the diesel bus out you get
an electric car instead an electric car
has you know really damaging lithium-ion
batteries in it and is then gonna run
electricity coming out of coal power
plants for the next seven years
do you really haven't done a thing to
change things for the better how do you
know you made things worse that is
European environmentalism today and it's
the same America okay
I'll make a token precisely because it's
considered a spiritual issue the people
propose ideas like nuclear powers evil -
you cannot have that as part of the
solution
yeah well that's because it's a
sentimental spiritual issue that's not
because it's a real spiritual issue what
are you gonna use the spirituality for
then spirituality is concern with
existential questions it's concerned we
do you have a purpose of the meaning of
your life well if you're a damn soul in
the wind power engineer you certainly
have tons of meaning in life if you're a
climate school striking you have no
meaning at all get a life to begin with
there's something to live for so as far
as I'm concerned
spirituality yes but I'm much more
interested like you and I've talked a
lot about I'm interested in Tantra I'm
interested Uniting religion is very
child and again and on equitability so
which is a term that we need to spread
to people so they understand this
alternative to environmentalism meaning
that if you are for technological
solutions and you want to create an army
of Engineers out there who solved these
problems and really work with solutions
that work maybe a few little things with
the atmosphere could we make all the
difference with me we could come up with
some genius solutions what about the
next 10 years but that needs an echo
token approach which is basically
technological and based on engineering
and that's nothing to do with religious
theology itself nothing what about let's
say
tantric engineering am I am I being a my
stretching things here a better or no I
think it's just one thing that operates
within a universe of discrete units and
operates within the universe of energies
and fields of intensities and power and
material it's engineering okay there's
no such thing as spiritual engineering
engineering it's a top technological
area no the engineers do great work five
six days a week and it'll go in church
on Sundays we can celebrate the rest of
us can make you that but the engineering
work is soft it's deeply mathematical
technological physical it has nothing to
do with spirituality in itself it could
be don't you don't think people's minds
the state of their be
affects like how buildings look and and
you know I mean I look at I look around
the French village and I see that these
people at one point we're a deeply
spiritual and you can see it in the
stones right people have you know maybe
it's engineering but it's also
engineering with this incredible you
know a collective sort of sort of let's
say faith right now I guess I guess the
thing we do now is make rockets listen
if all of your faith it's no good in
itself remember we talked about the
original religion how to religion our
friends later it's about an effect so
mythologies about that effects religion
is essentially telling the people that
well we've got this fairy tale going on
and everybody if you believe in this
fairy tale we're gonna get handle stuff
you've got to get out of here you've got
a silver sauce and all of you need to be
able to move the next day but at the end
of the day the priest gets his points it
gets his likes from God if it tells
people the story that puts them on the
move the next step priests are about
peace move the McRaney peace at least
temporary periods of peace if people
don't kill each other and adopt change
those are the two priestly commitments
versus two people right so that means
that spirituality itself is just a waste
of time but if people do spiritual
exercise I spend a lot of time be
spiritual so they didn't God and do the
right thing then yes it's yeah they
might become better engineers exactly
yeah yeah okay that's why study Kristen
are working we definitely working with
the Akito Commission it's not in the
synthesis of book and it's not an adage
to limit evoke so that's definitely got
a part of the next book but its inherent
in the ideology were presented so I
would say a co tokenism was there from
day one and the story was sociology
started the original nomadic tribe has
been there all along we're saving those
Turner's for the third book but in the
synthesis book get the full perspective
it's it's all inherent to their ideology
working ok so you know we also said your
am honest right so so can you can you
explain that a little bit and I mean
that would make everything you know
that's what I'm trying to I'm trying to
I'm trying to move
towards this sort of idea of monism like
it's all one sort of thing engineering
and spirituality and and the spiritual
and and so if you're just separating
these things in different compartments
then maybe you don't have a holistic
vision enough even though you know that
might be a when you're born the first
thing you're registered that there's a
world okay then you try to crawl up to
your mother's to suck the tits you
unifying without world so you know how
to be your own separate entity about
twelve to eighteen months into your life
you start to realize you are an isolated
autonomous entity from your mother's
body that that's when the sense of self
appears for the first time that means to
come to de carton dead wrong no it's not
that you think therefore you are it's
more you are you're their brain think
rather than I think therefore hammers
yeah that's a good way looking or
started there was something there
there's some big thought it existed so
it's the other way around so the world
is primary so the first thing you need
to do what you do philosophies just
accept that there's the world
it's called universe universe means in
Latin means everything that's one thing
unique bursts everything you know so any
physics the work for that is gravity so
everything has an effect will absolutely
everything else man if we don't look at
the world say while working with now in
philosophies like a return actually to
the old division between cosmic scales
there is a primordial cause chaos or
some kind and then we can build some
kind of cosmic order based on that
that's fundamental to cosmology that's
actually it's works to that's exactly
why I proposed this idea in work with
physicists right now and I do two
different time and it's just they hate
that I use the word I'll inches we can
call an attribute sometimes so high for
time can mathematically just be the
summary of all time measured by all
clocks in the entire universe
and then put an average
you take that sum and divide it with the
number of you get hired for time
that's like the average split time of
the universe as a whole
you can slow down here you have to
explain Hypertime a little bit okay you
know more in a way that I could
understand today space-time yeah hi
oh you're switching it around the
time-space rather I'm Steines use of the
three dimensions and adds a fourth
dimension that he calls time maybe that
allows for mathematics to expand it
meaning that time is there relative to
the space so they intertwine with each
other and that's correct
you know Einstein in time undoubtedly
works so that means depending on where
you put a clock it's like no man the
weather stand still it will measure time
giving me it will follow the arable time
but if if I took a little trip out on
the planter space in the return here to
this planet I will have aged differently
from you if you stay there at the same
time so that that's correct
but that I'm standing in time or we call
it local time physics okay but if you if
you decide that time is the origin of
everything and then space comes out of
time he's just not taking - just about
the maddox and taking you're moving it
around to the other way they discovered
why would you just have one time
dimension you could just have two
temperatures or two different versions
of time so you would at Hypertime in
time you weren't the same with space
because if you for example work with
parallel universe theory take zoom that
could be different universes no they
could operate independently of each
other you have to assume that there's
some kind of a hyperspace within which
these universes operate independently
who can hyper space can be spooky
wearing all kinds of things but it's
called hyperspace
you can do the same thing with time so
be a little time there has to be hyper
time as well am I getting it well the
interesting thing is once you start
thinking what hyper ton could be a big
but song calls just duration you just
assume there's a pure duration they just
moves at the same pace throughout
history and then local time can move
stirring slow it or whatever okay this
global time you'd be to Tom damages we
have a flood sure you have a fluctuating
time and you have a regular time like a
clock time so you say exactly yeah yeah
okay we can't call it absolute time
because new to me that word dirty the
way environment listen today so let's
keep well let's go back to that but the
thing is that once you start looking off
that kind of hyper time could be for
example you could have time before the
big bad if you're gonna do mathematical
models on a possible Big Crunch that
predates the Big Bang
you can suddenly do that because you
can't do them with our starting time a
tiny town it's a stop at the Big Bang
it starts there okay now you can't have
another time that actually is older than
the Big Bang itself so if you're gonna
just work with theories like that you
could call the virtual time too but if
you want good theories like that you can
assume there's a hyper time now then do
something why don't you just start
discussing hyper time versus global time
versus local time you also discover that
wait a second we also have this problem
physics that either the world is
continuous or analog or the word is
fundamentally discrete okay it's an old
issue okay right got it yeah okay okay
okay we know that if we go all the way
down to the Planck length which is a
smallest unit we know of where anything
makes sentence below the Planck length
if it's even smaller that is what we
called pure chaos
mmm that the Planck length something
weird happens suddenly the spins become
on or off so the zeros are ones that
we're familiar with from mathematics I
mean we call the information zero one
right they start already at the Planck
length and that seems to be the case
with just about everything we have in
our current expanding universe where
nothing is ever destroyed meaning
information is never destroyed not even
in black holes meaning the reason why
the universe is expanding is because the
information of the universe is expand
all right trechie
why this information theory a little bit
like this is all called quantum
information theory yeah a whole new area
of physics
but if you heard about Holograms and
things like that that's all part of this
whole new domain and guys like so skin
and small in and get sick and all the
most brilliant this is the South they're
working a stuff at the moment they're
really far ahead of the rest of us
they're doing now quantum information
theory and they try to see if that to
work within loop quantum gravity theory
maybe you would strength your eventually
so all the different traces business has
been working on for the past 40 years
maybe could be different versions of the
same thing which which is quite likely
if you start talking digging really deep
into it but but the great thing with
hyper time is that hyper time would then
be some kind of a void some kind of
chaos meaning you could also solve the
problem whether the world is continuous
where the world is discrete by saying
it's probably both right so it's a wave
and a particle again the obvious cliché
well well even more than that even we
wait particle yeah I would say physics
we proven by now that the field is
primary to the particle because the
particle only occurs when there's an
absurdly involved otherwise it's a field
you call that field intensities so the
field intensities are primary to the
particles so that's not an even
situation no but this is more about
these great discretion because as fields
can also be discrete to deeper than that
deeper than the particle and the field
all that taught us how to think in two
realms at the same time but in which is
great but I'm beginning to believe that
we could probably get a Hypertime as
realized that's like it continued use
void of some kind on waits you then
build the current discrete universe
we'll see when we arrived with a
mathematics well what does that look
like as a philosopher I'm perfectly loud
and I'm even encouraged to further
pursue this idea and see what we can
derive okay so that's kind of like
reminds me of the heart sutra says form
is emptiness emptiness is form there
there there and then it says again form
is form it's not like what void
you said that a continuous void or
something like that
well I used the void maybe maybe that's
a bad term like environmentalist I'm
gonna have to skip it as we work further
with this I say to anyone looking at
cosmos and chaos but so the chaos is to
continues at the cost of this case is
discrete meaning even the words cost
wasn't chaos a kind of limited please
note however but this is just one
universe so that means the hypertunnel
working on it's just a foundation it has
to infinity it has no void in the sense
of anything empty no it has smallest
possible units and most enormous
possible units but it can contain those
two things but the Hypertime if you can
work on it and get it right he's
actually something which we can then
build the current Einstein in space-time
which apparently season valid for our
universe but that means that current
understanding in space-time is probably
not the end of the day and the glue it's
nested within Hypertime is how you're
saying it's it's all we could say
Hypertime is that on which the rest is
built okay
the great thing with these theories is
that if you can solve Hypertime
isolation the quantum information theory
we can solve problems like entanglement
meaning we can finally unified classical
physics conferences that would be the
ultimate you know Holy Grail you can do
that
meaning that means you also solve the
problem of the division of physics
between general relativity and quantum
organics as I close right don't we see
one universe is just a we haven't
understood on these two things are
connected with each other because
haven't thought bravely enough yet it
wasn't we enough yet mhm and this both
more complexity more simplicity to
better physics so you have to be both
capable of simplifying things and also
making them more complex at the same
time that's our physics is so difficult
oh that's great yeah yeah but but math
math mathematics alone cannot solve that
problem and the problem informatics is
like it can you can
in loops like string theory did and
certainly anybody does infinities and
transfers mathematics and alpha Lewis
there's nothing to in reality because
there is no infinity in that's my next
question really is how do you how do you
how do you translate all this to reality
and oh you do I mean I prefer not to
work with anything in mathematics that
is not connected to reality because I'm
interested in mathematics being a proper
representation of the representing which
is the universe itself the universe is
represented I see okay that was the
point with mathematics until we
introduced the zero and we introduced
infinity son now the serie song was
popular mathematics because it made
counting so easy for capitalists we
could not have built capitalism unless
you first accepted the zero in economics
that changed everything because we
suddenly had 10 in 100 but please know
that the zero in itself does not exist
in nature there's no such thing as
nothing why is there something rather
than nothing
is it wrong they ask questions there's
nothing there's only infinite play can
be not they cannot be nothing we just
have to get you steady that something is
something period there is no option
called nothingness hmm yeah we think
nothing that is because we did not exist
before a certain date we think nothing
less because we because we die one day
and again would be into anthropocentric
because obsessed with ourselves be a bit
narcissistic another hundred then we
think that the most no there is history
before us this history after us well the
Buddhist position would be like there's
no substance there's no such there's no
no thing like there's no actual thing
there's as you say there's just there's
just there's just one there there's no
thing there's no sense of underneath the
thing that what they mean by emptiness
they don't mean a sort of blank void
they mean they mean kind of Union of
plenitude and then
than zero or that's just because they're
missing out on the next important thing
in metaphysics and that once accepted
there's one world that's the only thing
that's one like nature says there's
nothing less than two nature meaning the
world is full of attributes of
difference mm-hmm so when when used
start registering a thing when you sort
of raise it a phenomenon even object in
the content sense that means there's
difference in fields of intensities
there's more intensity in one place than
there is in another for example I'm
sitting there at a table okay the table
itself is more dense than the air around
the tape that's a difference in
intensity between but the table is
supposed to be more full of space right
then the air which is supposed to be
more so okay that's that's because
there's no substance to it because it's
forces so if you look at an electron for
example the power of the electron is
amazing because any turn itself there is
anything it's incredibly small but the
power field surrounding the electron is
amazing so these fields or forces
essentially what what creates a
substance that we perceive as being
substance and so now we know that from
physics and that's not even you know
disputable but that's how it works so
that's a trick of the mind but there's
certainly something there and I'm very
much a philosophical realist there's a
real world if you don't believe in it
just get blown fold it and walk around
and hit the wall a few times you
certainly God says knock yourself in the
head with a hammer
it's a worldly dependent of your
fantasies that comes back and haunts you
constantly if that's the case so should
we move on to religion perhaps then
since we've we've judged that with what
monism and all that we also wanted to do
also wanted to talk about
Zoroastrian and I kind of put a bit of
Buddhism in there so okay where does
dualism come from
dualism is basically a Western Abrahamic
phenomenon suddenly juice and eventually
the Christians the Muslims decided that
there was spirit and body and they'll be
separate from each other
mm-hmm that is the West I have no
tolerance for dualism the origin of
dualism is called Gnosticism not the
system comes out of the Middle East and
it's heretical movement in surah Astron
ISM starts abdominal and certainly
caught on with Egyptians there is
somebody cause I don't caught on with
the Egyptians was because Egypt had boy
pharaohs it had the who boys who got the
title of Pharaohs maybe that there were
gods and Kings at the same time and
there were what 10 years old now - 10
years old somebody tells you you're the
tyrant you can decide anything you like
you become a dictator you not even get
on even the sexual creature yet you're
probably gonna dream about yourself
being a god right you're gonna build
pyramids mm-hmm
in fabula at least to build cigarettes a
cigarette is a building towards the sky
or two priests walk up from two sides in
the cigarette to declare a mythology
that puts people together right the
nerve to be trying to created a global
grand narrative so people don't have to
kill each other okay doesn't we do
today's please do one now the parrot of
that Egypt was that you skip the stairs
and just built a pillar in the Georgia
sky a pyramid is the most useful useless
thing you could ever come up with
it's absolutely no use whatsoever
it's just an empty symbol of the vanity
of a ten-year-old boy Pharaoh
that's essentially what a pyramid is but
the pyramid was assumed to shoot you
into the afterlife so you could kill our
countries and soldiers and dozens of
concubines and anything you wanted to
take with you to that sort of harem you
were going to the Carradine's we're
going to your afterlife it becomes from
the session with the next life this is
what Nietzsche called certain life
denying philosophy that yes because
Larry goes to the next slide but the
body can because the body obviously
deteriorates you can you can turn your
set your body into mommy
hope nobody sees what you just did but
you know the guys to made the mommies
realized we're actually kneeling corpses
here it's all make-believe but in
reality this course it's just it's just
makeup we're just filling it full of
purchases stuff so it won't brought so
quickly but it really needs a corpse
right so you're dead hey you're okay
doing this amidst the idea that spirit
and body are separate from one another
and of course back fantasy is only
created by somebody who's too ugly to
 okay what do i bleep people do when
they're envious of people beautiful to
get to a lot they create the idea
that oh but it's much more noble not to
 it's much more noble to be spirit
away from an evil body so the body is
disgraceful and sinful and anything to
do with the body is bad
whereas spirit high on itself can just
lift off to be divine right can I stop
you there for a second
what do you do with the ugly people then
I mean it sounds like a brutal statement
a little bit well you're saying no
Nietzsche said they took over the world
they called the Gnostics the ugly people
take over the world
yeah you know there's a lot of autistic
people out there ugly these days and
they're agnostic too so they'll all they
do is that they said well the spirit is
tired the body's just like you're cut
off your throat here and anything buddy
Throw is bad and whatever is above your
throat or your head your mind is
beautiful your spirit and there's
usually spirit above the mind too so you
you don't start about a serpent from one
another the promise is it's there's a
logical problem to this now if this is
fair to the body they all basically work
with each other even if one is evil one
is good otherwise you wouldn't be alive
now how do they communicate with each
other if they're two different
substances well they never solve a
problem they just whisk it away so that
well we don't want him to deal with IDs
is that sacred knowledge we don't
understand them no you don't I can see
that the fact that inside yourself you
have different you know qualities you
have you know your your reptilian brain
which is sort of doing one thing and
then you might have a more subtle you
know brain and there's doing something
else and then no no that's just
attributes of the same body you know
perfectly well your brain is not
operating without blood the blood is not
there unless
to eat you know and let's deliver and
then kidney function you're not gonna
have the iron in your blood
this is a system that works that's just
attributes of the system you know I am a
radical Manas meaning I believe I am a
body and a brain and a mind and all of
these things are intertwined this brain
cannot exist without the body in the
other way around so otherwise I die so
this is one system there's no different
substances there are two substances here
just one substance and I'm an aspect of
that substance which is the universe and
mass effect of that substance are not to
do that's me so are you because our
bodies are like what about what about
ego what about you know much of our
experience of psychosomatic right we
what am I trying to say here we don't
see things as they are
no of course thought your own your own
ego your own sense of self is a
byproduct of the brain's operations yeah
does exist outside of that but the
pointer is from the Gnostics own world
we have they did the spirit in higher
than body and they're separated and in
the India about the second century this
becomes analytical manic ISM in many
case it was briefing the biggest
religion on the planet pushed or astral
in some east and it puts Christianity
was manic is usually successful mijin
and the leading mannequin was a scholar
called Augustine and he converted from
mannequins into Christianity and it took
within this clear its separation of
spirit and body into Christianity
unfortunately to Christianity the
Christianity is an Augustinian religion
and that's essentially it's the same
thing as manicures since then Christian
has dealt with the facts where the body
are separate the Spirit is high and
bodies low okay so that then becomes the
light went to Europe and 7th century
decart I think therefore I am is then
his soul is separate from the body again
it's the same dualism and this goes all
the way through tomorrow counts perfects
the Enlightenment vision of dualism
what kind of dualist now finally in the
early 19th century we arrive at Hagel in
Hagel as read Spinoza who by then is the
only radically modest philosopher out of
the West I would say like this partly
too but he doesn't
the no say it's the radical Manas even
says everything is once everything as
one says it God and everything else is
just difference in attributes of that
substance now I'm a most physicists so
was eggle accepted Hegel turned out on
physics around from Spinoza
and said thank you for the inspiration
Baruch now I'm going to do it the other
way round
I'm gonna start with difference look at
the world from difference and see how we
look at difference dialectically to sort
out things so he creates a wonderful
system for thinking which accredited
accredit ever since then if you've been
intelligent after Hegel Espinosa
you're basically dealing with these two
guys and how you're gonna figure out
whether you're gonna see differences
primary whether you gonna see services
are primary it doesn't really matter
it's a bit like you can either work from
physics as an emergence and understand
physics well you can work for say
biology and understand biologists and
merges with its own lost its own habits
and then work and understand biology and
biological evolution so you can start it
that way like now to me I'm neutral John
Hagelin Spinoza
I love spittle sort of bits I would say
that my worldviews fundamentalist
illnesses and I'm using Hegel to think
meaning as a thinker I'm incredibly hey
Julia so that's dialect I'm not doing
list at all I'm honest and dialectics is
essentially the road towards understand
this modest universe better it's a
logical procedure for you're gonna get
at the truth of things so weirdly
we're living in the shadows of Hegel and
Spinoza and that is with Western
thinking is now there is though that we
just got used to monism
meaning monism is either Hegel
dialectics or it's spinosus monist
pound faced worldview Morrison was
always the thing in in the east
Towson yeah Buddhism so rest in ISM and
him Euston well say we talked about in
disarray literal monist religions okay
I'm not really sure Hinduism is - to be
honest about all kinds of weird ideas
I've been carnation that don't really
fit into monitor but with Buddhism and
we know in some ways or asterism you are
really dealing with this world news
maybe the universe is one is huge amount
of attributes of this universe and we
ourselves are expressions of that
universe that is always a better way of
looking in the world because it is
correct you don't run into the problem
with two different substances finding
you know and then you don't have any
clue how they communicate with each
other because that requires a third
substance and then you lost it rather
you look at the universe is just one
substance period and to understand this
substance functions physics right and on
that substance you can double that to
means for example the world of biology
which is an emergent property on that
substance so biology becomes out of
physics and some they just occurs and
because it's something just occurred it
operates according to tone rules so do
you so do I now with Morrison you don't
run into problems with science got throw
down with you can step right into
eastern thinking and you can get it you
can immerse yourself in it and you can
also get into 19th century Western
philosophy but he took until the 19th
century and the recognition of Spinoza
by both Hegel and Nietzsche until you
finally got around to understanding the
world from a monist worldview in the
West that might be called the
materialist world you I don't care when
it's material on it's just one damn
substance as far as I'm concerned it's
pretty material okay so so you've been
pretty anti-christian and all this but
one thing I said at one point was that
you thought that the Catholic tradition
introduced something called mercy and
this was important the idea of the idea
of the idea of mercy right yeah but that
is nothing do we do even is it may be
may be required do we listen
to get started you know like life
originally started on the very special
circumstances we don't need those
special circumstances
so maybe dualism was a reason why you
could develop concepts like grace and
mercy because to be a beautiful spirit
you had to you know you did save me with
your body and then you went somewhere
and somebody was grateful to say we
forgive you persons because you didn't
body because you were just got a body
and we although embody sound like so we
can forgive you for that
it's possible that that's the case
because grace and mercy will probably be
required what they did it have told
tsunami hits us in the next 10 to 50
years because everything will now be
memorized and if you don't have great a
summer say we cannot stand each other so
point taken but it doesn't mean that we
can accept dualism because doing is is
wrong and what the zone Aster's did when
I converted to racism was that they
considered all the dualism Manicheans
Gnostics the masochist there were a lot
of dualist religious coming at a person
Babylon especially in the early part of
our you know after after Christ about
the period those first four hundred
years and they're all considered
heretics by the surest really funny
moments and I find that interesting so
Aston administer aggressively Manas
religion there's only one in the
universe period it also essentially it's
a sauce tree
so what do you do is is a raster in I
mean what do you practice what is your
praxis like you know in Buddhism there's
all these series of things you do right
and and I guess not most religions
there's a bunch of things that you do
it's not just a cup of coffee meditation
called the awesome rule so that's sort
of the meditation okay I mean I focus on
what I'm gonna do that day and I can
focus on having a constructive mindset
and setting our clear goals that I want
to achieve that day there you found it
great and then I do those things and
amortize those things and I don't wear
it around like thinking what else am I
gonna do I stay focused we do what I'm
supposed to do and that is all sort of
dripping down for my overall purpose
with my life what I find before it's all
very ethical semester this is just not
have any morality is it purely ethical
really didn't mean he's only interested
in cause and effect so do this little
thing in the morning this
thing means the wave you do that's like
equivalent to the way you like whatever
you think he's probably gonna be what
you say and we'll just say it's gonna
produce the act commit and they have to
commit with the starting point for the
next thought so this is like a circle do
you wear this circle meaning that when
did you swing when you Sun have to make
a decision you need to be prepared for
it especially if you're not prepared you
don't know what you're even there for
having to make a decision
for example avoiding crashing a car when
that happens no train yourself for it
it's like you're almost free program to
do the right thing that happens that is
incredibly sore ass the approach so we
can meditate them you study and when you
solve your own existential issues with
yourself and find your archetypal role
in the community and you get that as I
saw last and you get it right we do it
mm-hmm it is the most successful they do
have ever had when it comes to education
when it comes to income it goes to
social networking effects the only guys
in America I'd be the juice it comes to
education one of an income are the
saurian immigrants from Indiana Wow but
there's only like 150 thousand on
there's only 150 thousand of them in the
world right there some Parsees in India
uh-huh no about 3 million committed so
Astra's in the world today and they'd be
about 50 20 million probably if it
wasn't illegal in a lot of Muslim
countries to convert its for a statistic
these for your article versus going on
in you rock at the moment because Iraq
especially Kurds you don't want to be
Sonny Muslims any longer because they
associate that with a strong state so so
our system also works taking other
religions like the aucd's in Iraq for so
we could be pretty tolerant
we're not regressive about our dogmas
and things like that no sir asterism is
actually fundamentally very liberal
religion it's also very ethical so it's
like the opposite of other religious
what other days where you convert people
or whatever yeah finally so about
conversions and aggression and stuff
like that's the problem with both
Christianity and
so restoration has the opposite ways
that the most liberal intolerant fallen
religion is the original Orthodox
version if you're an Orthodox or a son
like me you're the liberal tolerant
person that's because the original
scriptures racism the gothis which is so
a stir some text
it's an incredibly liberal and
liberating text he's a saint
thrust essentially celebrating
civilization and what he's saying is the
people who do settle down rather being a
marriage and invest in their own future
our children are worthy of the fruits of
their labor because they knew way more
successful than people who just wander
around so Tantra which later arrives of
course in India and China originated
since or asterism the tantric approach
to the world the idea that if you invest
in the future I don't want often do
whatever you silly things you might do
today the rather invest the future
the cleverbot thinks original that's the
surest an idea and that idea is the
origin for example in China China and
Japan which originally surest you into
distance they can be solved in a back
acting training to China and in China
they were interpreters chongxin and only
like in the 19th century did we add the
word Buddhism to it so you can add
Buddhism or sera stays with Thomas into
just about any school come from East you
discovered all throughly just embrace
all three schools for example Tom trace
both Saurashtra and Buddhist toast I
mean there's there's Tantra Hindu also I
mean there's no the ball yeah there's a
problem yeah I don't like I caught my
calls harassing some towers of Buddhism
I call the silk group to try it
we've enrolled leaders along the Silk
Road yeah
Hindus didn't spread the same way and
that's because it is really compatible
it's not one path there's no one
teaching you could actually take Wade
along the trade routes because Hindus is
facing with just acceptance in Indian
culture all the rich variety or beliefs
mm-hmm that's where you can worship an L
called one day and then you worship
Brahm on the next day and you worship
Shiva and calling the next day Hinduism
is incredibly interesting to study the
original mythology it is a lot of Hindu
mystics are dealing with the idea that
maybe time is an illusion you know all
of these things that are happening
around us are just like a ephemeral
there's a lot of him to miss just to
deal with that and they come from a
Dravidian tradition in southern India
really and that's also why the homicide
young reincarnation okay reincarnation
requires the separation of spirit ambani
so you run into the problem dualism
again and I would say most of Hinduism
has a problem with doing this in their
heart they were dealing they call it non
dual you should have kind of make it
suspection it why is it non dual if it
isn't just most well I've heard one
explanation I can tell you you know
there's there's no there's not one and
not two so no you know because if you
say - you're wrong but if also if you
say one you're denying you know
diversity or so so okay so that's not
neti neti not one not to us that's
Cardinal whatever but it isn't and this
you know there lot about should be going
in somebody's will note that but you say
you're not something haven't really do
find what you are so I would say that in
itself certainly brings the alarm bells
to me I'm a radical modest and when you
look at non dual teachings coming out of
India they are often make that last
little turn down that could really say
well the reality are the 1s itself is
also dilution so there's like time--as
solutions it's like this is one sort of
massive being the brahma and then you
say well there is change difference
obviously no universe is expanding right
so we live we die evolution or Nexus so
there's the Kali Yuga and all the cycles
of time that they describe it yeah well
that's changed so it changed Eastern if
change is an illusion then whose
set up this whole theater and they
arrive with the idea the world is
originally some kind of a theatre he set
up wasn't kind of God playing around
with us that's always very around we do
listen and that's why I'm not a Hindu so
I don't buy into the dualism but there
are Manas traditions within Hinduism
that are compatible interests innocent
Buddhism Buddhism itself was one for
them yeah and the only reason so racism
wasn't one of them although it's also
been practicing in this because of
racism came from Central Asia was
developed in a different part it was
give up Northland because and it also
came out of the same Indu Indu Iranian
original folk religion and and so as to
consider himself a reformer he was a
mystic who basically said no no no no
this dish is one substance but this
substance has different attributes in
the first attribute it has different
from the substance itself see it
deserves its own name is mind go to
school the mind only school you know the
magic analysis mind only okay so as I
said both meaning that there's both mind
and there's body meaning that the two of
aspects of the same thing but this is
Morris the name for this is an Odom
master Maura means being that which has
be ultimate whatever exists out there is
older but master is the capacity for
mind to occur mean there's biology and
our biology comes fundamental
consciousness or sentience called mind
in our mind we can also be conscious now
the factor we became conscious being a
part of this world it's pretty amazing
so that's called Moscow and it's
important here to stress that this
arrest is consider themselves to master
yes Lee where should the mind you know
who would I ask they don't worship being
that's where they also think they differ
from a news they don't worship being
they worship the mind why is that yeah
yeah it's a choice and what you did but
but all the nuts kind of seems like a
dualism me minded being around aren't
they aren't they aren't they
the same thing okay Cody put it back do
you remember that I told you the last
time we talked that religion and
sexuality should be unified yeah I was
good actually what does work okay well
they did a sexuality were never
separated least mm-hmm
were that's what you have Tantra you
know it's a cart of time tries to teach
you how to contain your sexuality
it's a spiritual practice since they are
what I really didn't such a United yeah
but hold on but there's why why are
their forest monks why are there people
going you know to practice celibacy and
that kind of thing because more bad is
working with sexuality isn't that's what
you have in Catholicism well that's we
haven't but you know that there's a
monastic tradition in Buddhism as well
because there's no like like also are
monks and nuns mm-hmm there's no
separation there are no sacred holy
people like um beliefs or you know
envious who golfin be the bed superior
spirits to the rest of us like today
hey social justice worries don't ugly
and they serve our lives but they feel
superior to you and me because their
climate strikers same shade again so
this was something this arrested
freelance would happen that's when I
hated dig Gnostics that's when they
hated Americans put them outside of the
religion said no no we're radically
modest and meaning that it's believers
should be if your own monkey roll monk
and nun we're all part of the worship
almost maybe worship monstrosity meaning
we are philosophers
master Yao's that means the love wisdom
of Sophia and goddess of wisdom a lot
Sophia in Greece
arrives in Greece twelve hundred years
later and it's a literal translation of
the person term mastery also so the
original philosophy wasn't per shot not
in Greece and the original philosopher
is or aster that might surprise a lot of
people yeah they haven't studied history
properly they haven't understood that
anything went down to the west it's
usually bad imitation or whatever they
did in the East long before the West but
back to religion and sexuality now if
you unite religion sexuality you don't
need dualism because they did
that creates space for do listen to a
car he said he didn't stick Charlotte
are separated now religion that becomes
something finer and I said sexuality
becomes something dirty in religion
becomes associated with spirit it's a
challenge becomes associated with body
and spirit and body they become two
separate substances for spirit resides
over body and it's something the whole
universe must be spirit and it must be
body meaning that ya body is your body
and there's a spiritual world of spirits
and ghosts or whatever that's higher
that is the good Gnostic universe which
is a lie mhm if you realize that
religion spirituality should be united
it should have been all along and you
generally do with that's actually the
case you get a more interesting
Childress that is between the furnace
and the matrix the family you know we
talked about this like the measure it's
the Patrick II story we're gonna get
higher and we're gonna get you know
create a better civilization but also go
to sell ourselves it's a direction to
where we're going tomorrow morning
there's the matter are called math
triple story time that's the one it says
that everybody's gonna follow us and
that means the oldest woman walks to the
very back better be ahead of her she's a
bitch because if you're behind her
you're in chaos
that's exactly of chaos like you're
Peterson says is always mother chaos
it's always a goddess right in Hinduism
interesting it's Shiva and call me
Hinduism is also religious not afraid
she's full of dicks and I recall the
temple is full of chaos which is the
ideal the wound like if you're out of
the womb now don't ever think you're
gonna come back to such as cancer you
need to say then grow up but you can
literally choose if you want to be so
asteroid Buddhists mmm because do either
gonna worship the matrix which is what
Buddhism does which means you just want
to meditate and stop having desires and
stop having drives and just be in a
completely pure empty consciousness with
no affiliation whatsoever to anything
you detach from the world I would
question that in terms of as being the
ultimate of Buddhas
but no that is Buddhism according to the
Buddha
so raster Buddhism is a little bit
different than tantric Buddhism is a
little bit know what is it I know
because your dachshund wanting to
realize I'm gonna arrive at that point
the unification if you choose for
asterism you choose it because it's
family it's all about civilization when
I mean it could opium today comes
arrested Jesus or us
no I'm also a galleon which means when I
picked the chose religion
I studied dollars are acids and Buddhism
and let's go with a Taoist and try to
unify the two and I was completely
certain that would be that smart
that's why China has enormous problems I
moved from Zen to to touch of Buddhism
for perhaps that same reason but touch
Buddhism panchik Buddhism and zou chin
and fudgy extremely really emphasizing
on on skillful means and and where is
Tibet located got the peak but the
phallic peak of the world no no the
Himalayas yeah you're really a phallus
worship aren't you
no I was asking where is it located not
where it was higher law injured three
major civilizations in Asia
civilizations over five thousand years
old ok which are these three
civilizations what are their names
China Persia and India now the benefit
of living in Tibet or the end of cush is
that you're in the born on between these
three civilizations mm-hmm so you would
expect people who live in monastic its
and they in the mountains of Tibet in
Himalaya to quite you know rather wild
experiment to throw these things around
no that is exactly what under Buddhism
does so it involves both the phallic and
the magical that's acceptance or asked
Anissa
what I was gonna say was born never had
conflicts with each other mmm there's
not a single ready state conference
between Sirach as a Buddhist mm-hmm
because there's no big for it it's a
modest world view so I don't have a
problem with any Manas for me whether
they like spirituality not a problem
with Manas I don't have problems he said
this one world
yeah great we can do science together
because for the world together but
historically when you look at these this
is partly simplification of course these
teachings then go in and out of fashion
with each other and because they did
trade route religions tell us influence
each other mercy I'm sure we're gonna
find inventions we dig deeper into the
histories or asterism when we discover a
lot of influences from other
neighbouring religious losses Americus
interactionism or never United
resourcefulness and Buddhism got along
well meaning that's evidence whereas
tourism is not a dualist religion like
aromatic rates Brown if you started the
golfers after some you just call me it's
radically modest Taoism is the same
thing or Taoism does in China is that
really tries to dune if I saw Rasmus my
Buddhist which one don't you I thought
it was Taoism and I thought it was
Confucianism and Daoism that's what I
was sort of tired no no it's a political
ferment about ritual that's about okay
sorry it's definitely not a little no
Taoism is Chinese religion par
excellence in Chinese cultures immerse
today I think the problem of Chinese
arrived at though is that this obsession
with uniting yin yang mmm-hmm means that
you're gonna have a culture obsessed
with harmony and balance sound familiar
yeah you talked about that last time yet
indeed yeah yeah what's the problem with
Hermes it's too clean it's not it
doesn't have an army doesn't doesn't
have an edginess to it it's it's it's
too perfect so then it then it opens
itself up with its excess of perfection
to to falling apart into chaos you know
yeah so apparently you don't have to be
doing it's like potato loss to be
innocent boy injuries about perfection
immortality in Chinese have done that
all the time as well even in the maan
you could also stay the distance
arranged ina Europe - simply because
they're located where they are mm-hmm
because the River Valley cultures where
you cannot read horses that's too
expensive and then you got the steppes
north of China and the steps east of
Europe and they're always full of dead
people and with these staple bred horses
they started starving and just put their
ass back on the horses and then writing
to your F in China plundering so the
history of disarray in Europe in China
is actually very similar all right yes
well actually I read somewhere that
China China should be a bunch of little
countries like like like Europe it's too
big to govern itself in a way that it
could have ended up as a bunch of
kingdoms you know just like your a
position for most of its history the
uniting the uniting imprints of China
are actually quite rare so China has
been the different promise of China do
have a lot of the defense as well that's
such a bad system if they would only get
over this whole thing with communist
dictatorship they probably would do fine
but anyway uh my studies is that I would
be happy to convert to Taoism I could
have and I chose to convert his Lawson
ISM and I think it's a girl you need to
make that decision also because it was
neglected to be honest about its
philosophers from the West from China
India and had been so for what two
hundred years and a person was
underrated there was a brief moment in
that I could send you when everybody in
France and Germany was into Persia yeah
there was a brief period personally I
studied I studied Eastern religion at a
university I you know I don't know I
don't know about saw rest rien ISM
I probably probably heard about it in a
survey course but but I'm quite - it's a
surprise to hear you speak of it in a
sense because listen until the Austin
Arab invasion in the end of the 7th
century Strassen ISM was the world's
biggest religion for almost 2,000 years
ok and we're not finished with we're not
finished with I think the big brick tree
you think it's gonna come back and come
back on us or something ok well because
it is the only properly Universal midget
whatever it was build universe that's
Universal from day one
that's exactly what pushed up three
empires on it those are important
tolerant and pluralistic it's a great
mom to work from we can understand what
a global Empire could be today so I'm
working with Persian historians at the
moment sometime around the next few
years and I was in the rest of Central
Asia and cool Uzbekistan and Tajikistan
these guys are really into this and
archaeology in Central Asia is a huge
area Russian time unless you're always
produce great archaeologists they're
brilliant so it's a lot of stuff going
on right now we're discovering Central
Asia I also understand the Central Asia
during antiquity was green and wet and
densely populated and full of narcotic
plants and all kinds of fun stuff so
it's a really interesting part of the
planet to study them and of course
because the Silk Route is the most
successful unification product in Yunnan
history Silk Road is a good place to
start to build contemporary Empire
theory and understand what we need do
today to connect the world all over
again so we go right into conflicts and
blow off the nuclear bombs so the
nuclear bombs are still away more
seriously
climate change hmm okay so you're gone
we've gone full circle here perfecta you
could yeah what else did you have on
your mind for today that was that was my
list I actually I had well one thing I
had here I wrote down logos versus
mythos because I was trying to think
about oh yeah okay for the difference
between well we actually have six words
in Greek so why don't we involve other
guys to have a conversation with us okay
fundamentally storytelling is through
different types of storytelling it's a
battlefield
mm-hmm that's father and son
relationship that's logos there is there
is the the ritual just sexual in the
tribe of course it's pagan so the ritual
is for sexuality and religion II that's
man versus woman and that is pathos and
the third one is mythos which is the
campfire at night with children our
pathos and
yeah and myth mythology like Yoda pieces
has a story about we're gonna get moving
tomorrow we respect the metro we respect
the patriarchy the whole tribe has to
blue so the mythos and the logos in the
palace are all this year but then you
got these words ethos and you got Kairos
and you've got totals in it okay so in
the world of rhetoric these terms are
important now the question is could
these possibly be the in-betweens
between on three could it be quite
beautiful if you could have a map or you
could have all six question is then what
would connect the battlefield with a
ritual that would be like the masculine
real where like you deliver the battle
for clinical every what are a
lot of women during the ritual right
 so what would that be now what
would the connection between battlefield
and campfire because that's where the
father comes home and he sees their
mother's child you know the idealist oh
well I'm here to deliver to you guys and
to protect you so you like the center of
the tribe and you you are the scale self
that you have to provide me some kind of
order because this is where I gain
spiration from to the family so the cost
was chaos relationship is here changed
around women and children represent the
cosmos and it's the man of the world all
the world out there represents the chaos
because they're gonna be ordering even
the cows to deliver trade order inside
that traffic that takes one of these
turns - and the third one would be what
would then be between pathos and
missiles will be the connection between
the mother and child relationship and
with a woman that works off to get stuck
when that's certainwy the oily puss
accomplished in Electra complex come
into the picture prison this is like oh
I don't want something that I cannot
give her or mother will get something
that I don't get already puts Electra
complexes children are not allowed to
walk it around if they walk it up I
don't make it really up get
really up you don't put children
in a sexual environment for a good
reason because they're not supposed to
be there
so the powerful happens at night
children are going to
ed etc because the campfires early in
the evening with the children involved
because he's a story for the entire
tribe so mythology must must also be
mixed up with pathology or traffic with
mythic should not be mixed up now that's
interesting because you can then
probably and I'm not finished with it
you can probably put topples and Kairos
and Athos
did you want to each one of these three
mm-hmm this I think this could be
another conversation right
you could I'm not saying it's gonna work
I'm saying we know these three and
Raynaud's exists we have the data to
prove it and it makes sense and it also
makes sense for the prospective mother
child father's son and and the grown-ups
own sphere in sexual realm which was a
religion said that make sense time
access we can say that yeah pathos and
all those and and and and and mythos are
the three ways of telling the story
narrative is either one of these three
hey go
so next next time we can talk about you
can we can flush out mythos logos and
pathos and all and all that are the guys
out there so guys check out the turf
topos Kairos pathos you got the dopest
Kairos and those are the ones we're
looking for yeah mmm we got Lobos
battlefield handiwork mmm we've got
pathos which is sexuality religion the
rich space and we've got mythos which is
campfire which is storytelling it's it's
like where we're gonna go tomorrow so
that's where the children are taught how
what it means to be grown up so we got
three terms W Ethel's which is the right
thing to do and talk cause when it's
through you know Kairos is when is the
right time to do it and tapas is which
is the right environment where to do it
apology so bigger so all six should
somehow be in there if we look at the
Greeks idea of how to do rhetoric
properly and rhetoric is of course the
birth of merit this was the Greek
original ancient understanding of
different types of narrative so we
get homework to get homework all you've
got something help us to solve this
possible the six different the six
different forms of rhetoric placed on
the map of the grander tribal narrative