hello thanks for tuning in alright I'm
gonna talk in a moment and give some
context from my conversation with Greg
which is really just awesome
for some housekeeping so links below for
the circling Institute in all of our
courses we have a online art of circling
training course open for registration
and we have I think it's July 11th and
12 the weekend coming up all online so
and we have a Thursday night event that
we do online as well which is a drop-in
event all that information is below if
you're interested in working with me one
on one just go ahead and email me my
emails below as well all right so Greg
actually contacted me after after our
conversation with John reveille key and
about about a notion of where we in jump
in Johnny's conversation talking about
one of the central part of his Tree of
Life his theory is the justification
hypothesis basically of and we go deep
into this but I was wanting to bring
that into the conversation with John and
we talked about moving moving in our
conversations from the courtroom to the
the courtyard and so John and so he did
this basically wrote me and said let's
talk right so what a great guy brilliant
mind radical thinker thinking so deeply
about things basically revealed a
unified field theory of psychology which
is if you know anything about psychology
you know that they kind of reinvent the
wheel every time right so he he really
got underneath there and showed
basically a very deep unity or a way to
look at things that shows how they one
system involved into the next as
complexity figure theory in there as
psychodynamics it as sociology I mean
it's it's it's really comprehensive and
quite innovative and so in the
conversation we go deep into that is
system and we we talk a lot about
circling and the primacy of
intersubjectivity and what happens there
and when it goes wrong what happens to
us and when it goes right what happens
to us and it was really great talking
about circling and then him bringing in
terms of his system was really
enlightening for me it was really great
but also kind of just revealing how I
think the thing I got about this is how
personal like it really is for him his
ideas and how risky that is to allow
something to when something like an idea
like an insight that a deep mystery
to bring that into the world how
personal that is right so we talked a
lot about that and I just really get
this sense of um the deep place of love
that this all comes from with him and
reveals and so I really enjoyed getting
to know him and I look to have him on
again and happy that he's part of the
conversation all right much love the
bike
oh hello Greg hey guys welcome welcome
welcome to my screen welcome to the
channel welcome to the universe if you
haven't been officially welcomed yet so
one place the guest and the host will be
here your screens a beautiful place I
already feel the warmth all right it's
good to see you and it's been good to
see as I was talking about before and I
want to give you a chance just to kind
of talk talk a bit about your work so
people who aren't familiar with it can
can get it a little bit of a handle on
some of the terms and stuff that we're
using as we go go through some of it but
the one the one thing I notice I'm I'm I
mean I'm just really impressed with with
your tree of knowledge and the whole
system that you come from great and in
psychology and how you bridge so many
different things ontology epistemology
all that that really I know in what I
understand is the attempt to kind of
bring unity or realize unity in a field
of psychology which is like we're you
know a psychoanalytic system will
reinvent the whole wheel kind of every
time right I mean it's just known for
that right so that's right
so I know that it's so psychology as a
science is is just as riddle has
additionally been riddled with like a
lot of ambiguity right which which so
just the fact that like in a very real
way you were able to realize a kind of a
way of unifying it that that that in my
in my view really didn't didn't level
down to use the high daguerreian term
like didn't level down right any of the
particulars but actually exemplified
right why it showed up like that right
and so that's just just the mind that
that's that thinks in that way I just
have just really been impressed by and
appreciate a lot I feel known I
appreciate that intro and frame
yeah I mean the I didn't it's a in
retrospect it's one of those things you
look back on you're like gosh I can't
believe how you know that and so now I
try to tell everybody so at least about
the what I now call and I'm trying to
popularize the problem of psychology
yeah yeah which I really I wish we
better understood because I believe and
obviously my life's taking me in this so
I'm biased this way but I really believe
it's an unbelievably important mystery
for us all to be aware of yeah and it's
pretty straightforward and basically
modern science you know gets its legs
and from Galileo into Newton and it
really established in the 17th 18th
century and then we decide hey we should
apply this to human experience basically
and you know in terms of there was
called psychophysics and then Wilhelm
wundt
and then they saw they we're gonna try
to do a modern science analysis in other
words I mean it's the language some
methodology the ontological epistemology
not necessarily talk to us but just hey
how do we apply modern science to this
thing we ever recall psychology it
seemed like advanced but what happened
from 9:18 you know if we go back a
little bit to 1850 and by certainly 1930
while this fields trying to get its legs
what happens is emerges the problem of
psychology we let Vygotsky nailed he
called it the crisis okay back in 1920
so what is it well I like to enter it by
saying okay physics what's that well
physics is the science of matter and
energy on the grid of space and time
basically you know energy matter their
interactions are baby okay what's campus
all right science of the atomic elements
and their behavior in a molecular form
what's biology as a science of life what
is psychology yeah yeah and it's like
well it's behavior in mental process
okay yeah but and I bought that line I
thought that oh okay I think I know what
that is and then you and then you
realize when you actually know
how to look for it what they then say
all the textbooks right away and they
say what what we really do is we apply
the scientific method rather than folk
psychology or subjective opinion which
makes psychology unique is the
scientific method of behavior and mental
process yeah okay but then you go back
and what do you mean my behavior and
mental processes and then no one has
there's no consensus
so psy clinic people and and
psychophysical into introspection
structuralist people and the game's
functionalist
and the John Watson behaviorists and
then later the neo behaviorist another
cognitivists ah different conceptions
yeah what the center of the discipline
is that's amazing right amazing because
that's not the case in biology people
have criticized me or said we'll wait a
minute we don't know what life is in
biology okay it's like you don't know
what the edges of life is yeah the
coronavirus alive when it sits there on
the desk the question okay how many got
one of their plants alive and why it's
so different and that biologists a
science of life broadly defining yeah so
the biologists have the center
psychologists have no center yeah yeah
actually you describe some of the
questions I've asked about my own life
[Laughter]
actually yes funny but it's actually
right you know Bobby I loved your
conversation with John and I heard
John's awakening meaning Christ love
with him you know yeah and and your
question right there is exactly what my
whole point is is that actually the
modern scientific enterprise which came
dominant and displaced yeah the the
religions before which I though they
didn't have the right logos in some ways
they had a lot more to say about our
meaning yeah yeah and then so science
cuts a lot of the legs out from under
that right
and breaks down at psychology right it's
not accidental that we have an acute
moderate meaning crisis my life other
than just getting money and eating fun
things and having sex and being
self-interested until I die right it's
like well that's capitalism for you you
know you're you're a physical entity and
you know you're self-interested based on
evolution and you're so go out and do
that it's like oh my god that doesn't
know soul or the spirit you know that's
and indeed I think it's fundamentally
wrong yeah and so so I think that's
connected I think the absence of right
but yet the science deeply connects to
our philosophy of our psychologies of
our societies what did you yeah sister
it's like kind of there's a sense in
which I just you know as you're talking
about this you know I want to think
about the scientific method it seems to
like its core method is to bracket out
everything that is basically subjective
or psychological right so just like yeah
and so how do you deal with these
phenomena called mind that don't are
connected to right to a substance like a
substance yeah I could see a kind of a
crisis out of it yet having a as a field
a pressure to be scientific yet a
phenomena that won't reveal itself just
in that way
exactly exactly a minute yeah exactly
that's what that's exactly where in fact
so what Watson does is he takes strictly
the scientific method yeah he says well
if I'm gonna use this as my lens
consciousness is gone right right and
then the arguments about what all that
is and we never got the right
descriptive framework for what we mean
by the term mind that's what and and
that's what the tree of knowledge
teaches you is it gives you a new
vocabulary to talk about this concept
mind right and if any changes are some
of our definitions so for example if you
know the shape of it it goes from matter
I don khon a matter yep into life and
then into mind and then into culture yep
now I'm and by each one of those at
least when we're talking with the
language game in the tree of knowledge
each one of those are capitalized so
that you know prop there's a proper
conceptual definition and reference
point right so mind on the tree of
knowledge yeah to the third dimension of
behavioral complexity yeah which is the
animal mental dimension of complain
right okay and what that means is the
argument is that animals are playing the
game of existence yeah at a sub or of a
superordinate level relative to plants
and cells which in a game of existence
at a superordinate level relative to
chemistry and atoms yeah yeah yeah and
it and the first thing we want to do is
get that landscape right which I
actually call capital and mind right
right yeah so this is gonna actually
address a key problem of the observation
so that day what are we actually
observing and what is our language
referring to yeah yeah yeah so I've got
fish right over here and a fish tank I
don't show you but anyway the fish are
swimming around well they're swimming
around is mind I'm looking I wouldn't
look out there and say that oh look at
them living which they are yeah then
that's mind yeah yeah look at them and
look at their mental behavior right guys
went around and I feed them and they go
up me eat I'm team mine just you watch
your plant grow you're watching life
yeah right right so now I have a
language that says oh I am now I saw I
can be a scientist and say I study mine
defined as mental behavior gives me a
behavioral definition of mind Hey
but what it but the behaviors did is
they just call it they were so anti
mentalistic they didn't realize that
actually they weren't interested in
behavior in general like drop rock from
a you know building they're interested
in a very unique kind of behavior the
behavior
Moses holes with complex bodies mediated
by a break right right
totally that's it that's what animals do
and that's what they do so crazy
relative to plants or rocks right right
right
suits in that so the adjective mental
says oh that's the unique way in which
you know so if you have a dead cat falls
out of a tree and a live cat will fall
similarly but the live cut current lands
on its feet and takes off well yeah
actor out the gravity and you say well
the landing on the feet taken off that's
mental behavior yeah yeah yes good I
guess
right so that's a definition now of mine
not conscious not phenomenological
consciousness but now we actually
language of modeling totally yeah we can
actually have third-person right one of
the things that the system does is it
helps figure out cuz you're exactly
right this split and you out you know I
know you know some about integral theory
yeah and and this is Wilbur's totally
right about this he's entrence show you
know the insides that right hand side
and it's that external exterior
epistemology that you can take camera
yeah hey not too sciences it's that
observer measure of it you can look at
and I can look at and it's whatever the
camera records right right right
can't take a camera of your inside yes
exactly so that's why I was always
really complicated but you know make a
camera behavior how we interact yeah so
it's kind of like basically what I'm
hearing is like mine the picture I'm
getting is everything that you described
like there's this there's a sense where
the movement that you see is somehow
comported to beyond itself right it's
like it's it's extended in some way in
responsive to what everything else or
what in its view so just like sense of
responsiveness rapes whatever you see
that that phenomena we remind right
exactly and once you learn how to look
where you see really easy its sense for
Aristotle at the sensory motor animal
level yeah the vegetative level yes I
just I call it functional awareness and
response yeah yeah you can observe
somebody you you we pay all attention to
what other people are paying attention
to like what
you're not paying attention functional
awareness of response right right
totally from a third-person perspective
we see it all the time right I call it
this I call it the excuse of why I'm in
trouble yes people trying to control
your attention and they see you're not
paying attention exactly the start of
all mine the rest of the tree John would
appreciate that from a relevance
realization absolutely yeah
yes so the argument is is that the base
here of mind is this cognitive
functional process of Oh cognitive
revolutions like oh we have information
processing you know nervous system is
that yeah and then you have the base
what I call mind one is this
neurocognitive functionalist view ok and
then what you were getting at with what
I call mine - mine - is subjective
phenomenology right right and that's
that's across the epistemological what I
call the pistol ma logical gap that's
the Wilber interior/exterior problem
right right and why the scientific
approach to consciousness is really that
level of that kind of consciousness is
very difficult yeah you can't look at it
with a camera yeah yeah and experience
it from the witnessing function of your
own perspective right right in the in
and so that's like that's that's after
that sits above mind well that's part of
the mental dimension the argument is get
a brain and we actually don't know but
somewhere along the animal kingdom brain
level it into bees and insects I don't
know we don't really know but certainly
by the time you're on a rat ok and Earth
ok maybe my fish invertebrates there was
a 10 years ago there was a whole
special issue do what you know what kind
of pain if any do fish feel and then I
had all these experts on consciousness
and needless to say it was a very
complicated question interesting
arguments on both sides that's it
you know no they're basically robots -
yes they definitely feel pain and at
least at the Journal of Fisheries in
2009 or right under the special issue
buzz I read them and I was like I think
they feel pain but do I owe and do we
know not really a bar does it go down to
a worm feeling pain no we're not really
we don't have a good understanding of
mine - okay yeah yet in the emergence we
know so I think that it comes you know
and I love John's system we're gonna be
talking about this I think there are
these electromagnetic waves that become
the root of qualia of adjectives of
qualia and then so not as a witnessing
function that emerges with a brain
probably in the know what John calls
have adverbial qualia oh yeah that's an
organizing system and I think certainly
my fish have a little bit of that yeah
that's what I think but we don't know so
we have to go down through humans yeah
to that because humans have mine three
yeah so mine free is the jump from mind
into culture and that's wood and it's
conscious justification in the
justification hypothesis and
justification system series the theory
of human mind
three great good so I can tell you el
guy this is what I feel I feel a little
nervous coming on your program and I can
narrate yeah so that's I can report on
my subjectivity so we can at least have
an access point right right dog doesn't
have right and and our mind threes take
us in a totally different you know
that's the culture dimension of
complexity is my yeah yeah that those
these leaps of complexity I just I think
that the sense of I think this is what
we were talking about before we started
recording a bit is like one of the
things I really like about your thinking
right and what I've experienced of it so
far is it oftentimes like models explain
things to me right but I don't like they
don't necessarily open up a sense of
wonder there's something about something
about the way that you're talking about
it where I actually get this sense like
I would just find myself thinking oh you
like this leap into culture right this
this third level of mind I just found
myself just naturally going oh god man
whatever it is that even made that
possible what does that say about that
right it's just like there's these
really really big questions that I don't
get the sense that you put a period on
those questions but you open up the
questions right in a way of making
phenomena more accessible but with that
but without without exhausting the
mystery has the famous exhaustible right
right no I I do so what I seek here is
I'm seeking coherence okay what my and
my orientation my mental structure is a
zoom out state coherence yeah that's
that's just my default logic structure
attends and you know and I sort of saw
the puzzle a little bit of psychology
and then I had my first insight in 1996
into 1997 was on this justification idea
um language of mind one - mine too -
mine three been but I had the insight
that you and Jonna dialoguing about in
terms of okay there's something that
happens very important with language and
the basic story is is this and this
created a cleave between our primate
selves and our personal selves yeah and
I want to say the way you and John are
talking about the person concept that's
the person culture plane of existence
open am i writing now I often refer to
us as human persons yeah well think
that's redundant yeah it's not a
conception I'm a I'm a human zygote and
then I grow into a human being at Earth
but I'm not a person and so the mission
of justification yeah gets involved and
I stopped getting self reflective
awareness a self conscious
accountability for my action on a social
stage right but identity that's a that's
the
person culture dimension yeah sended the
animal mental dimension right I mean
believe I heard you talk about it before
is like to get kind of good at to see I
think you're talking about you know that
that we have narratives of you know on
cartoons like you know a but like a
sponge can be a person right yes like
that it's it's not it I like that
because it takes it away from like as if
a person was given with the human form
right right right this is actually Peter
or Cerio is a psychologist I discovered
maybe eight years ago or so he developed
he saw the problem psychology very
clearly and developing called
descriptive psychology and it that was
framed that's actually what I would call
a descriptive metaphysical approach
which is metaphysical and this guy
descriptive metaphysical what's your
concepts and categories what is the
death penalty's like to find your terms
right it's actually a very good you know
what Dean and I realized that psychology
is this is landmine did so did a serial
man he one of his most famous works was
the behavior of persons and he really
deconstructs and that's what he realized
like the concept of a person is
something you grow into and learn how to
play basically and he pointed out that
in science fiction you know this is how
he made it clear to me like Java Baja in
Star Wars he's a person right he's not a
human but he justifies why he took Leia
and what wise things he's doing he's a
complete person at the full and what is
it that define him as a clear personally
instincts well he justified his actions
in a self-conscious way you know and
navigated the social stage as an it
front with a narrative function yeah
that's what so so really you're like oh
yeah you can really just associate that
concept from human beings that's really
interesting right and that and that gets
to it well it's kind of isn't it isn't
that the case with feral children right
where they're well they're not on that
human stage in his past past four years
old and they didn't they were that you
know sensitive period not say you know
human development super complicated
there's a lot of but absolutely man you
grow up in animal with animals and this
sensitive topic is legally there's a
definition of person that transforms
this it's the issues of abortion debate
and things like that right Anna from a
scientific descriptive explanatory way I
am a person a James Mark Baldwin said
this very well ego and alter are born
together
ego and alter born together he was a
developmental psychologist early when a
great genius developmental cycles and
and that's true at both our attachment
relational level so in other words the
way we know the way an infant is
co-regulated yeah yeah well I is
circling so powerful is whereas
mirroring and empathetic level of I see
you in me I mimic you I imitate see
where your attention is and I feel the
mirror right my phenomenological level
and that's what we built
we're very social so we're very a team
to mimicry and intention and in the
social relational feel all pre verbal
yeah
but then if the verbal side of the
equation right and that's what the
justification and you guys are seeing
that it's like wait a minute I start to
get out here in the stage social stage
and there's all these rules narratives
ideologies yeah what is legitimate and
what it's not
yeah and other people occupy the social
relational justifications space yeah and
you're into it and being a person means
hey why are you doing what you're doing
and is that okay and what are your
reasons and and voila and so now it's a
logical justification process yeah so
very very it's a very relational yeah
it's so interesting because I think one
of the things I know that in the email
after the after I took like you watched
me and John's last last video about we
were talking about you know cuz I was
trying to bring as I was trying to bring
in what you were saying about
justification into the what John and I
have been talking about is as dial
dialogic going into dialogue owes and
all of the phenomenal elements of that
right
which has just been fascinating for me
and revealing actually revealing of
experiences that I've continued to have
with bringing language to him like has
me be able to make them so much more
distinct and like because you can only
relate to things that are distinct right
let's try it's like the language but
where where I think it was John that
said he came up with yeah die Lobos
right and I would also probably say
circling right is is is moving from the
courtroom right to the courtyard right
and it's interesting because I like that
because I think what you're getting at
is that you know it's fun it's tricky
because you know I we your clinical
psychologist - right yep yeah yes yes
it's like that's the thing like that I
mean the super-ego and the justification
and all of that is like can't be the
things that just drive people crazy
absolutely Oh totally so yeah so listen
there's so that you did just a bit what
the justification dynamic opens up I'll
tell you this
yeah the best way to really get a grasp
of the layering of it so there's
actually really three layers and you
guys caught two of them and you were
into itting the third so is the court
room yeah that is the defender okay and
that and you're in conflict and a social
pressure not I'm not being literal but
it could be of course literal that's
where the whole structure is now you're
accused and to be held accountable or
punished as d legitimate and then you
defend your justification of yourself
right okay right one and that's one key
feature yeah I mean actually is the
structure of self-consciousness is in
part paid it to that right the left
hemisphere the isn't just an analytic
reasoning system it is a defender when
necessary if you are it's attached to
the social field and your place of
social influence I have what's called
the social influence matrix yeah which
is your heart is tracking and we have a
barometer of social influence of
relational
back ok right people know and value us
and love us for the things we want to be
loved for that's great I mean that's
nourished with the soul yeah yeah that's
what pulls us and went up like no we're
gonna get critique you're gonna be
ignored you're gonna be rejected oh my
that's up and that's a deep that goes
right in even basic physical pain that's
sort of yeah right rejection is like you
know yeah yeah registers as physical
pain and it does absolutely it's a void
that it's very the emotional pain that
comes out of that is very deeply
connected right and I think John
mentioned you know public speaking is
people will fill for the percent of
public speaking fo because it's worse
than death
I mean they will fill that it's just not
and so the idea of a crowd deciding that
you have failed and you've humiliated
yourself yeah this that in Michael a and
a hunter-gatherer society that's not too
far away from death right right it's not
accidental so so you have the courtroom
side of your justified then there's the
social pragmatic side yeah okay which is
the courtyard
basically yeah and then the interesting
thing about justification it goes all
the way up to analytic philosophy okay
all the way up to that's what I
discovered they really realized this but
I mean what Plato realizes that the
history of knowledge is defied true
belief yeah so you have a propositional
statement and it does it correspond to
reality is it therefore true the belief
is it true and what is the level of
justification in lay the vacation that
results in that correspondence yeah yeah
so so justification at the analytic
level actor then ruse all of Western
logos hmm the Western logos problem what
is what is analytic and true effective
of social courtyard dialogue logos this
is why the analytic people are you dial
auditions you know who that what but I'm
gonna do my math yeah yeah that's
analytic justification or
right so so the justification when I
realized with this concept does that go
all the way from a Freudian idea
it explains why we have biological
psychological drives right not socially
acceptable that we've internalized and
we sit with a eco based justifier let's
try to actualize and repress so that we
navigate the reality of our social field
yeah okay yeah totally
that's Freud's fundamental insight now
we can put it totally on an evolutionary
history the evolution of language
created a problem yeah right right okay
so it's like hi because when we now on a
field of justification people start
asking questions why to do what you do
if you piss me off and we have a clash
of social influence or many with the
utility of language questions are easy
to ask they're hard sir yeah and so how
do you explain yourself and if you're
attacked and then the other issue is
well how do you we just get a lot of
stuff you know what did I do
but then there's what do we do in the
courtyard why when do we get up and move
together that's our social pragmatic
justification right right on the line
when they discovered mathematics then it
gave rise to formal analytic questions
of justification joy well what is
objectively true independent of the
social and subjective which by the way
roots us ultimately into science yeah
yeah for justification in subject so
yeah totally getting at that so that
social aspect I think it's it's is it
fair to say something like so you what
you're not saying is that like I mean to
talk I mean you're talking in like
existential phenomenological terms
you're not saying that I am a being that
then is social and then justify it's
like it's more like no I am the being
that in its being is already always in a
in a social justification and oriented
in that way and concerned about that and
like it was like it's it's deep it's
really right in my class all right
absolutely and in fact so I mean deep
into the phenomenological organization
yeah
so I don't know if you've seen a picture
of the influence matrix if if you
haven't and you show pictures on your
thing I'll be happy to pull it up but
the influence matrix Maps the socio
emotional relational field of our
phenomenology right and what it shows is
that it's just it just is a depiction of
how we're organized to track place in
the social field intuitive yeah and that
is fundamentally organizing and then it
organizes us in terms of our we are
fundamentally defined as attachment no
our firstborn activity we know our
mothers and fathers before we know
ourselves yeah okay looking for the co
regulatory structures of the other okay
where we are in the social world in this
we were unbelievably intimate and social
before language so so now missionary
level and and ontogenetic level we are
beans right the justification problem
emerges on top of that and in that
context yes so even in the even in the
sense of like you know hey this is this
riddle I've been thinking about you know
of where you can kind of get the point
of it
you know if I'm an artist so I imagine
I'm an artist and and I just I paint the
most incredible piece of art ever and
then the moment I'm done and I'm
cherishing it and I think about it being
seen by other people and I imagine them
criticizing it right and so I can't
tolerate them the idea of being
criticized so I destroy the painting
right so the question the riddle is is
like well did did did I did I avoid the
criticism right I mean I think what
you're what you're kind of saying you're
kind of saying at the deepest level have
really no in fact we're always already
in it's like is it is it fair to say
that an experiential a level like the
way that my my life is animated right
shows up for me close to me is imbued
with sociality right absolutely right
absolutely you know and and one of the
great western weaknesses I think is that
that fact is horribly underplayed with
what ends in dental ego and analytic
justification emphasis
vigil istic especially United States and
its individualism we are our social
network of Rihanna the web of relation
you know that we are embedded into both
the mental and cultural levels of our
existence right so crucial um so yeah
absolutely
and and I think we failed to
fundamentally appreciate that you know I
mean under Gabor's got this
I mean hunter-gatherers and a new very
dangerous aspect of human sociology was
power right people would collect
attention and power and influence and
actually virtually all other gatherer
systems are anti dominant what means is
if you try to take more power than
Europe share elective basically cuts you
off you get some warnings yeah and there
are a lot of stories of five hunters
going out and for coming back because
they've got taken power in a way that
you can get the message right right they
support the matrix's there's love power
and freedom on the process dimensions
well they emphasize love and freedom
over power too so we have collective
mutuality because power dangerous well
you know we forgot we did we bagged that
idea you know we basically are like
money and power and individual
achievement you know I like to say we
are Trump
not that I'm excited about that but he's
a caricature of the value relational
value structures Obama
hi Eddie right money and power and
asserting that you're right and doesn't
matter and you know talk 200 gather
people they'll tell you you know you're
guaranteed you're gonna know sickness if
this is the way you try to structure
your relational dimension because then
people feel the resentment they feel
that the struggle they want that power
that everybody wants it cousin Edison
that's it yeah you know so it's a very
very very this big dynamic here we have
to figure out pathways of love and
freedom oh that's right totally
so so the thing about um yeah I mean one
of the ways that like one of the ways of
you know I sometimes think about this
too is this level of like
I mean this is this stuff is just
fascinating to me and this is one of the
things I've learned in circling and just
being in relationship if we say circling
is kind of a and this is what I love to
kind of talk with you about of like from
the model of just articulating some of
the things that happen encircling my
experience and dialo ghost and
everything we've been talking about that
that seemed to be so central right and
one of the one of the reasons why I
think circling is and actually the role
of technology to around this like what
what is that like what is the impact you
know and a lot of this really comes out
of my grappling with Heidegger for come
over the last 20-something years right
what he talks about you're familiar with
his work around technology recently but
this is on my to-do list especially with
John and everything else so I actually
list right here and a couple of hires or
things I need to check out some
underdeveloped on Heidegger I'd love to
go
I'll talk to I'll talk with you about
Heidegger anytime so basically it's just
kind of like his his senses is he really
highlighted how that we that we don't
he's not talking about technological
mechanisms or devices he's talking about
an understanding of the being of being
so the context of context right like the
background sense of what by virtue of
which anything is at all to us how it be
the ad structure right yes like as a
person as an object he's just basically
saying he's saying like technology has
this way of his like things show up as
positions right as is available for
extraction of energy or endless or
durability and then even our bodies
right even our bodies like we look at
like body you know mind hacking right
all them all you know I condemn I met a
bit directly okay but where by where my
where I've been really interested in in
in going well how about why did circling
right a few guys like dorky dudes right
like use of childhoods right like like
stumble along this thing
about relating that glow to us what
within within 15-20 years how did that
go get all over the world that practice
and and so I feel that that that on one
level the answer to that is what
circling is right yeah I think another
level it also discloses a lot about the
world right and I I've just wondered
about you know with the given that this
justification dynamic is so central to
like the structure of our being right in
a certain sense right and we're always
in it and that for for years and years
and years most of that has is almost all
of it has been like it it's done where I
say stuff and you're it's in direct
response to other bodies right and all
these different what happens when all of
a sudden there's a division now where I
can uncollapse the relational dynamic
which you know there's tons of morality
and ethics and something just happened
in our bodies right when like we
outsource all of our communication to
where you don't have that immediacy
right where are most of my friends are
people I've never met right and it's
through text exchange and there's now a
division and I I have a feeling that
that's you know 35 years ago if we say
that circling to say is like a
relational yoga before technology right
in innocence social technologies I don't
know if it would even make sense to do
that because I'm some so many leveled
there was so much interaction by virtue
of living right that if you had if I had
to like exchange information I had to at
least call you and deal with the
courtroom right baby
no absolutely right what is like what
what like when you look at like what is
it yeah so lots of lots to say there
what's this
so first yes I would certainly say we go
back to her gatherers certainly well
that's sort of what we did yeah yeah
yeah all right if we say that then we're
like yes
think you are reinventing I think what
you did is essentially reinventing the
way were structured right and had lost
yeah okay so now let's go with your
Heidegger point let's go back to look at
invention it's like my website it's all
part of what we need for it's a central
part of book that I'm into what I call
them whiteman 2.0 which is a fundamental
reboot so that we actually align our
knowledge and wisdom structures and our
practices yeah with our nature that's
that's what we screwed up we don't oh we
gave it over to science I had a I had a
conversation with one of my nephews at a
family reunion in New York oh it was
like he's had two two classes in college
like what did you learn well basically
I'm all just a bunch of camels like that
your parents my brother and sister put
spent $20,000 and you your philosophy of
life now is that you came back and your
cares and your loves and your is that
what you really realize you know so they
adds a physical reductionism okay
physical physical reductionism I know
just which is wrong and what does that
do you okay right okay
so so look that's a tragedy yeah so now
let's go to what hire is catchy right
yeah Heidegger is catching what I do
know about how yours is fundamentally
organized around the essence of care
yeah bingo all right and and how we
position ourselves in relationship to
the environment yeah okay okay that I
didn't know I doubt it I mean I but the
joint point from like to mind is called
behavioral investment theory right and
what it says is the nervous system is an
investment value system that organizes
the expenditure of your work energy yeah
okay yes in other words at its essence
it is a care system value system and
it's orienting so right so from that
arrangement Heidegger's going through
phenomenology but this up their nervous
system evolutionary nervous okay
no no about them but actually if we see
their behavior we can see what they care
about in terms of their the
Yeah right alright so so then let's talk
about care there now let's go from my
fish
okay to dogs and then primates the
social mammals great all the way up into
our pre verbal ancestors who lived an
unbelievably complicated close-knit
gathering Dunbar number communities
right where where my whole existence is
fundamentally dependent upon what the
women gather and what the men bring home
to hunt and what are together right
right okay so now what we have it's not
just a me versus the environment and
caring about the environment but is me
existing in a field of relate what I
call social influence and relational
value right right uh-huh and what I'm
tracking what the unified theory says
that we are tracking in our relationship
system is the experience of being known
and valued by important others yeah yeah
then against the experience being known
and valued by important others that's
the barometer right right because the
fund owning value other people work on
my behalf and if I'm not I in other
words if I'm cared for yeah and care
about in a reciprocal circling yeah okay
right
which as to my mind is it what it does
is create a culture to enhance our
mutual relational value
yeah because I and I married you and you
mirror that back to me well it's like
it's it spreads agape its words yeah yes
yes and it makes people like I like I
like what John highlighted and his
theories about it that way that was yeah
right that's that is the energy that's
the relational energy and then we just
learn how to justify and what happens is
if you learn how to justify on a
foundation of love then you become your
true self yeah okay yeah right yes then
you're known and valued this is what
Roger saw right Karl rock is like as a
therapist I'm gonna create a context of
non-judgmental acceptance unconditional
positive guard and accurate foundational
empathy
organismic valuing process of the
individual yeah yeah right so I'm gonna
sit here and I'm gonna see you guy I'm
gonna see all that you're trying to do
is circle I'm gonna see all that you
have accomplished and all your fears and
hopes and I will create a context of
fundamental accurate empathy yeah
basically agape love right great and the
ideas oh my god that's why I called
actually the private to public the
Rogerian filter yeah yeah if you are
unconditionally accepted the essence of
your desiring self for both expression
to be noted value if you hook the heart
and your head in my relational world
then that's social flow that leads to
flourishing and real realization its
potential yeah actualization that's the
trip that's the growth towards
self-actualization because you get that
though when you say well I love you if
you believe in me and you do what I say
right now all the sudden you got the
public private now you're gonna lie now
you gonna hide now you go to descend you
create all the static between right and
like a defensive yeah basically oh
somebody's gonna judge me somebody oh
I'm in a position now I got a defense
carve out my territory and maladaptive
cycle of chaos right so interesting how
when you think about what I when I think
about the how the West basically it it
it ritualized that structure in the
court system right the courtroom is
seems like it's almost like a perfect
like like archetype of that right it was
the professionalization and codification
of justification yeah yeah that's
exactly what it is they had to create a
they at once before when we can all do
it and sit around in a dumb bar number
one and it was all about reputation and
indigenous you know and you would do
something and you make up and bottle off
but I'm at the level of civilization
there are thousands of people involved
okay there was to adjudicate so we had
to create in fact this is what
civilization did is it took what was the
indigenous level of justification court
the room courtyard stuff the real level
of I know you and you know me and we
have a history we ever shared narratives
or knipfing structure of what our
community believes and then we built
civilization well now you have to have a
top-down broadcast structure of some
formal system yeah that creates a
hierarchy that everybody then it
downloads the ideology and then you have
more and more complicated rule
structures that then de Judah Kate you
know because you can't based on
indigenous negotiation right right
there's it so there's like um and one of
the things that you said in a way and
when it asked you to talk a little bit
about to was you know what you talked
about something about well okay um
there's like there's a thing there's a
there's a threat right a thing that you
can do now call the leg with with
conversation which is reverse engineer
right that can you talk a little bit
about that like like one of the big
innovations if you will right was this
ability to converse and then reverse
engineer like your justification through
contract right right right so so when I
talk about reverse engineering what I'm
trying to what I mean there in the
formal sort of academic sense is what I
did is I reverse engineer the
interpreter a function of the
self-consciousness yet yeah okay
so so in other words rather than we have
the experience of just generating our
beliefs okay and then just descriptions
of what's going on and sort of what we
think but this is just what we see yeah
and what may propositional e make sense
out of us yeah well the justification so
the hypothesis tells you know actually
that things run in a particular kind of
program right right
totally it is functionally organized
those beliefs are not coming at you
randomly right those beliefs are
selectively structured to build a
justifying narrative
yeah hey based on your history and
current context of the social field oh
wait he has a child and once you build
your own self-concept system of
justification that creates an adolescent
level you now have this whole other
level of well what am i to myself as a
dialog with myself at the private law
right totally yes sir let's just
yeah that's internalized and then that
creates the normally the super-ego is
then the interject it was well alright I
have to internalize all the authority
instead of me so then I screw up alright
and so that I punish myself before other
people do because there's a lot better
if I punish myself yeah
that's why people will throw it out
they'll throw out the artwork or
whatever it is yeah God though people
would because nothing would be worse
than it's better to not get up on stage
then get booed off stage yeah yeah no
stage is really a life threatened you
can at least criticize yourself so you
internalize the critic especially for
folks if you have a particular structure
a history I mean do to some extent
Psychopaths 10 that's another structure
about why there's all this individual
difference but if you have a neurotic
temperament and you're somewhat
conscientious man you're you're you've
now internalized the authority and
you're vulnerable you'll be walking
around with that anticipatory judgment
to other this is the harsh critic
super-ego I anticipate that yeah so by
reverse-engineering once you know to
look at the consciousness system from
the mind - phenomenology okay so that
especially organizes a matrix
yeah trying to get its energy out a
particular way you know the whole eyes
narrator that has a realistic justifier
and I did see this all the time if you
know anything about family systems
therapy or any you know basic Eric Byrne
transactional analysis with a child and
a parent and a healthy adult I see this
all the time so the healthy adults just
trying to navigate but then you carry
around this it's real critic you know
from what burning issue and that filter
you know and yeah we can reverse
engineer by saying well what are those
where did that
what's that system trying to do yeah
yeah I seen the judgments of authority
and trying to make sure that your child
doesn't misbehave because when or screw
things up because you'll be punished so
you're preemptively doing that yeah
totally totally cool end and then forge
it yeah and anticipating it projecting
it indexing it out of the world and then
right it seems like that that's how you
know it's kind of like you see this all
the time where people have they'll have
you know twelve marriages and somehow
the same husband or say four names right
this this sense of like when it's worse
right it structures that the act of
trying to solve the problem becomes the
the enacting of the problem right
absolutely yeah so so you have the whole
point is then that justifying system
okay
it has in relationship to the
phenomenological system yeah and all the
psychological analyses say yeah the
harmony of that which Freud nails most
you know initially and then we talk what
I call the Freudian filter the
relationship between what do you repress
and what are you rationalize in the
structure of defense that your or part
of your mind
help yourself and other people about
your feeling part yeah yeah yeah all
right so that's that's the so your own
internal courtroom all right you know
and then what does it do when you when
you judge yourself that's unacceptable
you then create the shadow yeah yeah
totally so you fill they're not to
repress it's not like the feeling stuff
goes away it now inhibited and repressed
and builds up can't get exposed it gets
fractured in it Masonic feelings states
but now that creates a pressure you know
and people will very often split off an
attack I got a blog that went a little
viral called slid off an attack okay
right and what happened it actually was
the story and one of her friends and
they were both interested in a boy and
they expressed interest in my dog yeah
date well all of a sudden this friend
got super nasty towards her huh I know
people out there camp
leave that this would happen been for 45
year olds by the way yes yes right okay
so yeah I listen to a little bit of the
story and it was a pretty clear
narrative that she was wounded
she felt jealous and envious but
articulate that yeah another way to
express that and then just felt
uncomfortable every time she was around
my daughter you know right hey would
feel both the sense of shame that she
couldn't identify and an aversion and an
anger that something wasn't fair yeah
hey what you know yeah any kind of
weirdness that would make the end
because was always by you so it would go
you know yeah and this week out right
you know of course we say that what you
know have a look that is right
with so many humans do you know yeah and
that's why you know shining the light on
our shadow the shadow work of young or
you know from an integral perspective or
whatever so important to understand how
when we split off we create filters to
then see the world yeah justifying it
right and that's but that's the part
where whereas I noticed didn't kind of
like we circling is okay a lot of times
what happens is people people don't
people how you come to realize your
shadow isn't isn't isn't just like
reflecting on it
right although when you reflect on it
there's still the social aspect going I
even in the reflection right self
reflection like getting involved in
communities that tell the truth in their
experience you can start to onion right
you start to receive the thing that
you're projecting on them right
completely I know and we actually
haven't done it this would be sort of an
intense or it's called the backstory
project alright so this is and this is
AG you're exactly right about how we
actually learn because we have so many
blind spots we can go for introspection
with our blind spots so here's the
backstory what you do with the backstory
is you have a clinical psychologist and
a lawyer lead a group of all the people
that are important to you discussion
room while you stand behind a one-way
mirror yeah
and they get the conversation going
about these people about what's wrong
with you okay right totally yes okay in
other words the back story about what
are the hello people tell about you
behind
back when the filtering between pilot
and you're not around yes yes so you get
a psychologist and a lawyer to basically
make the guide people to make the case
against you right right right and then
obviously you guys keep going crazy on
the back side of the one man yeah you
decompensate you know and then that the
ego strain and you actually able to come
back from that yeah and then you went
through where everybody sort of had to
do it then up done what would that do is
it's a cleanse II it would allow the
shadows to be seen from interpersonal
field yeah your psychic field yeah where
they show up you know you want other
people see your how interesting how
easy at first as the other people
 you know we see now he's such a
bullshitter how hard is it to see when
we're okay interesting I think
we've done that like I've got in
advanced courses right because you're me
it also we would talk about it is kind
of like kind of like that especially
like the sense of the narcissistic wound
right the kind of the insult of of
needing to be reflected in a particular
way and if sure you know if you don't
like I'll hate you or right or I'll
dissolve but the but where we would have
everyone in the group would know each
other for a while like have a
conversation a gossip conversation right
as the other person would just sit in
the corner okay and then in the person
and in the print we'd send it up to
where okay the person actually it the
the goal the game winning the game is
really it's like find out where you got
hooked where it's like you wanted to
jump in there right and then just notice
all those spots brilliant and they come
up and we circle them right then they
start circling of like okay where was
the place I couldn't be with that right
right
then those it's like though that
exercise was on some level the most
treacherous
like great but also the most revealing
right okay well that's it that's so cool
that's actually you want to know you
want to get to the root and then I was
like Jesus you know you better have a
decent better of people I can tolerate
better be an MP chorus right because so
many people and then once it's revealed
and once you're humiliated you really in
it and you know and there's not trust
and then all of a sudden you're like oh
my god you really think that people
can't tolerate and Blake God be very you
know that is hey that's our terror our
terror is the rest people really don't
love us not and then if you actually saw
it and felt it and emerge in a way that
you couldn't metabolize it's scary
definitely but if you could do it right
you build a foundation you get you clear
the shadow out yeah foundation of
of connection you actually can talk
about you know what's really going on
and if you have that you can then get
rid of you know cuz so much of it just
builds up out of a miscommunication yeah
and it's all it's in just a sense of
that and I often thought about them and
I think about this is where I also I
just think the Catholic Church is just
brilliant right with confessions right
this this idea of like just the idea of
the wet or the insight that oh just say
it like reveal your shame right and it's
like absolutely that revelation is is a
is a restoration of some kind now you
know it's you know guys automatic and
all that stuff but right no but the
point of it notice if you from a unified
theory perspective what we have is
informational interface okay the way to
understand so you have a the
neurocognitive system that's not
conscious into the cognitive system that
consciousness system that's mine too
okay in a mine three when you're
rehearsing you have mine to
bouncing around in the mind one but
you're not narrated so there's a
disintegration and it's a big difference
just to say to yourself then to actually
say it in to what I feel the public mind
three space where you actually have
another person that can hold you
accountable yeah and of course they
protect it because it is dangerous when
we do say in psychotherapy it's also I
mean so now Mitchell same basic process
right going you confess your sins
and and by gaining mirroring about what
the things that scare you you can
actually then start will use mine three
to work them through and understand
their inner relations because it's the
building of the narrative end of effect
that is so crucial it's that kind of
network bridge and that's the quality of
I've often thought about you know a lot
of times like when that in that private
conversation with yourself right of
where you're justifying it with yourself
but you like you like there's some place
that you're inauthentic out here so
you're justifying it I think it's almost
like the motive I often notice like the
mode of that conversation seems to be
about talking to yourself so that you're
not caught off guard and surprised right
wish with whatever it is it's like
messing with you right whatever it is
that you're unsettled about but I think
it's kind of like the it it's in
disclosing yourself voluntarily like
voluntarily subjecting yourself to a
place of risk risky humiliation risking
every seems to be it seems to be on a
very it's a completely different thing
than if it was revealed by surprise oh
it's that volunteerin astray at every
level at every level so if we think
about it in this way I mean you can look
at a brain system that's in a reactive
state versus regulated by voluntary
control States okay I mean at a very
base level they voluntary control
behavioral regulation system is very
different than a reactive yes okay the
active systems are designed to be
defensively get you the hell out of
there because you don't know what you
didn't expect this and this is an
absolute threat if you have mean sized
it up yet right course straight to your
core fear yeah so an unexpected injury
it's designed to send electricity
through your body and for you to jump
back as far as possible and push
everything away that's coming at you
right right right now and so like when
we do phobias you know everything in the
faux B treatment
is get the person's efficacy into a
place where is that I think I can handle
this yeah and you know and it's in the
skill is getting that healthy ego to say
hey yes I want to confront this I want
to toll this scary thing about me I want
to see the picture of the dog okay if
they don't have that okay then this
system they don't have control so they
need cognitive adjustable Kotori control
and ideally behavioral investment
control and if they're in that system
then they can metabolize yeah because
they have a sense of mastery they have a
sense that they're investing and
regulating the system and it can grow if
their gates the inside you know and if
something comes out of the space of you
you're just into completely you know
you're a big corner in the dark and the
only oddly response is escape and get
this away from you in a Kurtz and why
would you do to me why would you hurt me
so bad in a way that I can understand so
that inability metabolize it just makes
it worse
terrified with a whole nother layer of
fear yeah yes I'm just appreciating kind
of like the frame like how a lot of this
stuff is is you're it's so integrated
into this system it just makes so much
sense there's also kind of made sense in
the way of like one of the like one of
the issues I've had around around
circling in the greater community of it
right is cuz whenever this whenever this
kind of confrontational like like psych
like the it feels like remnants of of
the of you know encounter groups and
stuff like that where it's like we're
aggressions just like let to go I'm I
there's a there's something in me that
just seems it just I I it's something
cringes inside because it's been
actually my experience of that know
there's what this takes is a virtue of
reverence right I think that's what the
practice of circling essentially is is
really encouraging cultivating and how
in guiding right
right because the you know when you're
defensive and you're an anticipatory and
you're like in your unresolved like the
last thing that you can do is actually
contact the other nosov the other right
know you dominate by fear for self right
other though like cultivating reverence
yes and it's the thing I've noticed is
like just like actually it's a lot more
people are already confronted like it's
not a Matt all you got to do is get
present with them right allow what so to
be there and people will be confronted
with what they're actually existentially
confronted with right it's in the
structure of our being right we don't
need you know I think you need to be
very careful of things that come to mind
with that and and I don't know enough
about the circling community yeah much
in a way it
Ferengi ated the value it's it frames
but certainly I know enough about
confrontation I know enough about
emotional expression I know enough about
a tree or some of movements that the
game is to you know the freedom to
express aggression in particular kinds
of ways okay
which is very it's a very dangerous
thing let's be clear okay so it has you
contained I think your board reverence
is unbelievably key yeah so to me what
that goes to is just is the experience
of relational value that each person at
the core the core of their true self
which seeks to be known and valued right
to be held and if we're holding that
we're creating a space in which that is
actually threatened in the trust is
broken on that then drop into defense
exactly for the constructive circling
process to Annapolis yeah so so you
that's a rule that's a bit you know do
you want to becomes if the old circling
is constructive relating its yeah yeah
then that's a you have to have the
reference principle yeah absolutely and
it's it's interesting it's kind of like
if it is um in the ability to become in
reverence for somebody seems to be about
because reverence my understanding of
reverence is what makes it reverence is
it implicitly is recognizes that when
your own limitations right
and being faced with something that is
has so much like a beyond this right did
I conquer right that's where it leaves
like reverence leads to aw so there's
that sense of more Ness right so being
able to look at somebody in contacting
reverence means you're contacting not
your your judgments or assertions about
who somebody is but like precisely that
you're contacting the mystery that they
are right right everyone every if you're
looking at the universe that's available
right is the spiritual dimension right
then that for me then that hooks into
the spiritual dimension you know
ultimate concern and what ultimate value
structures right that then guide us okay
so I have a said I had a saying that
says be Heidegger insensitive work that
which enhances dignity and well-being
with integrity right right so where by
dignity and well-being and integrity are
my big three values stronger yeah yeah
and and I mean and for me then reverence
gets into the date of the whole things
reverence but it's about dignity is
about the beauty and respect of each of
us individually right humanity as a
whole
yeah yeah and as that is having
reverence for that human as a whole and
each of us individually right from an
honor toward right give honor to right
absolutely
holiness team and I think that's where
though that level of perception and
cultivating that this is where I think
that people start to use I mean John's
talked about this it's been fun having
John go to circling and in hearing his
observations about like from his life
right yeah you know about one of the
things he picked up on right away was
this kind of like this like circling is
a secular by definition it's a secular
process but people have the experience
of these very spiritual experiences and
use this kind of spiritual language
right and I think a lot of it has to do
with it's because you're continually
voluntarily like listening to the other
right in their humanity in disclosing
yourself and you're getting that
autopoietic process right that you start
to touch into this sense of on one level
the person's unique once the current
suchness essence or something like that
whether it's also there's a like that
becomes transparent to this like the the
kind of an a fountain of intelligibility
that's beyond all of us that starts to
move into the conversation right we
start to experience it people have
experience that is like a spiritual
religious terms right yes yes and I love
I'm a naturalist but I love I embrace
the word soul in spirit
yeah in terms of my I wouldn't have ten
years ago but now I do so so spirit and
my soul refers to my perspective SPECT
ival knowing from the interior yeah and
the functional form of my life at the
biological psychological and social
Aristotle the incense yeah the spiritual
aspect of that is that which Orient's me
towards my ultimate moral concerns my
moral goal right okay which then
Orient's me and often to my experience
of being in oneness toward and the good
so the fundamental and as a human
primate when I feel a part of something
and we are building practices and
justification systems that are
distributing this goodness right that's
the embodiment so you feel the
phenomenological lift yeah yeah and this
kind of sense of also Tillich that
ultimate concerns the individuation and
and in participation this is like
articulates all of it right right right
well that that and I mean although
society deals with assume no I mean we
all what are we as individuals what do
we use this so self in society they're
often other the relational dynamics
between all of that
if we can freely come into harmony with
one another and feel known and valued
our essence yeah right it's really it
really is so what is it like you know
what's it like for you I've looked it's
just here like a little bit more about
um you know one is like how is it that
you came to creating Italy basically a
unified field theory of a whole branch
of science right I thought I mean I
doubt like after you graduated high
school you're like if I ask you what
you're doing you probably weren't like
well I know there was a story I was
skipping school smoking pot in high
schools yeah yeah I had a little bit of
a reading trouble I was not thinking
that I was going to then you know right
create a theory of knowledge you know
then I would say hey this is gonna be
crucial to the enlightenment 2.0
transition in the 21st century the
transition in my 20s that happened okay
you know so my identity it's been a very
interesting you know experience because
yeah it's the in terms of the short
developmental narrative I got I was I
didn't care might read school in high
school you know I did well enough
amounted to James Madison where I ended
up returning as a professor and then I
got I found that I had some interesting
capacities to understand things
undergrad but good I could quickly learn
arguments that people were making and I
had basically a quasi level reading
disability so I didn't read much then
and then I got and then I could realize
I understood then I got curious actually
feminism is my first intellectual
awakening and sociology I got I realized
that actually I'm one of four boys and
although my parents were relatively
enlightened there was definitely a
significant gender power differential
between them and that I wouldn't have
been aware of until I took a feminist
and sociology class her basically was
like you know the whole structure of
narrative here is biased
right really see that before right now
what applies didn't I brought that home
to my mom who was also sort of waking up
to another layer of feminism in her we
actually bonded around that yeah and
then I went into graduate school and by
that time I was actually I started to be
able to absorb a lot pretty quickly
I got really fortunate my Master's I had
terminal masters in clinical community
psychology universe Carolina Charlotte
great professors they're actually the
folks who built rich Tedeschi and
Lawrence Calhoun who are now actually
now relatively well-known for what's
called post-traumatic growth that term
and they were their original researchers
post-traumatic growth so in Lawrence
County my thesis advisor and rich
Tedeschi was my advanced psychotherapy
professor he was a wonderful
psychotherapist they were both wonderful
mentors and he was able to give me a
deep appreciation for those to practice
in the paradigm of the major approaches
yeah so this is 1994 and then I'm like
wow you know I used to be CDT because I
was the sort of empiricist psychologist
that's what I mean yes okay which I
thought empirical well that's that's the
right way to go because actual science
that's what real truth is all this other
one yes you know what Hey
then I was like man you know you look at
all this other stuff
Freud maybe wasn't so crazy boy did
Rogers gonna have him a lot right and
you know the same people and actually I
didn't had a supervisor that wasn't very
effective from a cognitive perspective
and so I just sort of like woke up to
the fact that these paradigms in
psychotherapy all have brilliant things
to say you know if I went done by the
best of the best you listen to him
you're like yeah they're seeing
something yeah so so then I'm in man
then like I said what's Mike one of my
ways of thinking that sort of had a
talent amount is jump back and cohere
back in kobir and so and that was a
perfect intersection between
psychotherapy and it's complex chaotic
paradigms with all 15 things so I jump
back to take a look at them and say well
why don't they go here yeah
my first problem is the problem of
psychotherapy right hey hey right so
then when I did that I was like but I
knew that psychotherapy was a value
based enterprise yeah other words if you
care about truth or do you happiness
know right well if you care about truth
care about happiness those are two
different things you yeoreum one inside
of yourself you know do you care about
systems and justice what do you care
about all right so the difference like a
therapies so then I was like well then I
asked moved from well what about
psychotherapy to at least have simpler
questions what about psychology if if
modern day biology is the applied
application of biomedical engineering
kinds of stuff based on human biology
why psychotherapy be based on the
science of psychology yeah
and so 1995 1996 I made that jump and
that's when I really knew it was like
that's when it started to dawn amis it
was not a coherent discipline right
great
I actually fell in love for two years
with evolutionary psychology the
academic discipline of evolutionary
psychology impress I own up on the
feminists some of the early way feminist
stuff about that was very
environmentalism was like well if you
believe in evolutionary theory and the
gender differences you're basically a
Nazi and this is not just science of all
exam so I fell in love with evolutionary
theory while a lot of my friends were
pretty skeptical of that but I then sort
of then disappeared into my own world
and by that time I was my reading
disorder was gone and I was chewing up a
lot of information well turned into a
bookworm by 96 so I went to the
University of Vermont to study but
basically I was just now on my own
autodidactic I was just on my own right
shooing up everything I could when I
trained in my dissertation was I did a
social psych stuff for my master's
degree that my dissertation was on
Beck's cognitive errors
and I got trained in psychodynamic work
by really well and and I was reading up
on evolutionary theory and so this was
1996 99 and then that's when the insight
about justification happened and then
had the evolutionary analysis of Freud's
key insight yeah and then I was for six
months I was just obsessed with that
once you see people as justify errs you
know I went through a whole evolution of
insight in those six months and then you
know every Friday Saturday night I would
engage in some herbal medicine which
would release some you know constraints
and allow me to be creative and then
sometime in the fall of 1997 I was
creatively exploring the cosmos as it
were the tree jumped out it okay and I
drew it up 30 seconds 30 seconds for
upside down cones matter like Mayan
culture I have the original diagram and
I mean just you just it's just a yeah
the integration of that transcendental
moment for Evan and I did blog do a part
blog series on his cuz I listened to him
talk about transcendental experiences
right exactly what mine was although
mine was interesting this John says a
lot of trends in dental experiences
happen at the phenomenological optimal
grip of your intuitive sense of self
yeah yeah I had that and I had a logo
smack yeah exactly so it's like all of a
sudden is logo left of my left
hemisphere and the right hemisphere and
Sun and the world were all right in this
unbelievable weird right of insight and
it just I just transformed my
phenomenological experience was was so
clear to me
okay and what mine what had happened in
my body and I saw it I used to hide the
diagram for the first couple of years I
hid it and had over do not reproduce or
or you know without permission I thought
that if somebody like yo Wilson suniye
Wilson produced the book of conciliate
the unity of knowledge in 1998 I think a
one after and I was in the impression of
he saw that he would immediately
be able to see that this is the right
formula and so I was working on it for a
year without telling hardly anybody
other than my family yeah private and
then I built it to a point where I'm
ready to share it I sent it to like
Richard Dawkins yo Wilson yeah her and
Dan Dennett I know one word back from
Dan Daniel unsurprising right right and
and so everybody just you know is the
total opposite reaction I was convinced
that this was a totally transformational
way of seeing it yeah they just shrugged
it off it was not seen as meaningful or
novel or useful what was that like for
you
yeah sorry really transformational I the
thing that happened to my ego and we can
you know in terms of my own self sense
of so that started in 1995 and really I
mean it's a night where all of our egos
Ronco but I am in your period of dealing
with this thing
yeah because well you I mean I literally
think I built a theory not just of
psychology but of scientific knowledge
yeah yeah it's really a treat now is a
scientific knowledge right well do you
think you built a theory of scientific
knowledge RIT law right right all's the
problem was of the Enlightenment and
sets the stage for the 21st century now
I mean you know the guy next to us yeah
yeah totally totally yeah yeah it's just
an unusual belief to have right I have
that belief and I know what it's like to
believe it and it creates weird dynamics
yeah yeah so for example my father's a
history professor you know any early
conservative and traditional not never
democratic honey no no political sense
but in a defers to the authority yeah so
and and he saw me rightfully in many
ways is not very bright so there's
always been early because my learning
disability and then I blossom but the
idea that his son would have done this
he doesn't know history well what do
with the experts say Oh God yeah so my
argument is well dad once then once the
experts see this thing they will
obviously have this store that people
have - okay yeah yeah for a year and
then we send it to the experts you know
and actually kindly he gave me a gift
for do Wilson he offered it we rose from
a thousand dollars for an hour of his
time so that I could show him the tree
of knowledge
so I sent it out to all these people in
like 1999 or whatever and just you know
got an email back remember Wilson well
I'll see what it's a prick I was like
well we'll see Hey right everyone just
you know said no and I need traction I
talked I talked to the evolutionary
psychology people so no one cared I mean
nobody saw it as anything meaning
so by 2000 now I want to get that like
well a couple of things it's like one I
first of all like you know I just want
to acknowledge the sense I I think what
I'm hearing great is that you're so so
as you're talking I can tell I could
tell like that that this is this is
something you do with your whole being
right like it's it's like this this in
it and I also I can appreciate you know
what you're talking about learning
disabilities and stuff like I had a tons
of them I didn't even know I had any
intellectual anything I was so many
totally yeah I think it is um
and but that sense of like what I kind
of what I kind of can imagine I just
kept getting this picture of something
was speaking to you right and it's like
it's it was beyond the horizon but as
you started moving towards it and it
started shaping you you started to
discover it right and and this is one of
the things this is one of the mysteries
to me right I'm fascinated with is like
how do we know to be struck by something
before we understand what's worthy of
being struck by
right I'm invited right that mystery is
this place where things like philosophy
and and and it it becomes the trans
rational in that way completely but also
deeply personal right so deeply personal
so just in the sense of just you know
writing it all down and then just having
the wherewithal being uh keeping it
really private like you know and then
putting it out and oh my god I'm just
trying to imagine what that I went it
was super interesting because I only
will a stood twelve can't remember
someone telling 1012 sessions and I
didn't go into it at first okay
I had this therapist any and I left two
sessions a session after a massive
empathetic failure with my therapist on
this issue
okay 1898 1999 and yes I'm glad eyes I
feel known and valued by a guy thank you
but people didn't get I mean you didn't
get what I was happening to over this
period and really a ten-year period
before I actually came to terms back to
my dad all the work that need to be done
but by this on the right in the middle
of it okay and I have basically sent it
out a few times and gotten some feedback
and people aren't having the reaction
and because it's a mindfuck you know
it's a complete blank box so you have no
idea as to whether or not you're because
you have your narcissistic urge yeah hey
are you seeing this thing so clearly and
no one else is seeing it doesn't make
any sense and it convinced people who
should be able to be convinced why this
is novel I mean I thought I now
understand it so much clearer but back
then it was a mystery so I'm in therapy
and I start talking you know and then by
my sixth session I really actually say
to him to my therapist I was like
actually you know I basically said I
think that I'm like a Newton of
psychology right okay my therapist says
you know I oh man I totally get that by
when I was in high school I thought I
right would right
like Robert Frost that's what he said to
me hey went back one more time never
told him exactly that and then left no
but an empath so so I had am pathetic
failures sort of all around people not
if you say that I you think you're a
mutant because everybody says that's a
quack so everybody seems that you're
just you know all right I'll empathize
patch on the head hell you know but when
you're phenomenology tells you to the
cells of your being that this is true
what you're seeing is true and you can
see it and no one else can tell you why
you can't see if they just don't they
don't see it it's not like anyone could
say Greg I understand your arguments it
was Greg that's unsurprised well Dan
Dennett tell me wha
let me tell you exactly why this is
radical and I'll tell you why it's not
us for know I'm not doing that so no one
would tell you that they empathize they
just dismiss you right and then you're
like you're stuck with it in your own
head you're trying to do whatever you
can now I mean now it's not coming out
of my locked box and I'm like yeah
totally
nope oh wow so yeah it was really weird
you know and it created all it created
some dynamics of my family my
significant other I tell this story she
knows my daughter knows this so my wife
and I you know we were dating since high
school but I go through this
transformation yeah okay to give you an
idea how Court went to me so she she got
pregnant with our first child so that
would have been it would have been 1999
yeah and I was so I was two years into
it and ready to go to a conference
present on it okay you know it was
flying and she was like seven months
pregnant we were driving me to the
airport oh my god what if the plane goes
down you know that comes up my ideas
right right give you an idea what she's
had to live with now she knows what I'll
be thinking about right Wow yeah yeah do
it like right down to it like do you
actually can in a certain sense you
you're the very thing they
you couldn't get anyone to really see
right which on some level I like to me
that kind of probably in a certain sense
is being seen right in that in that like
you know that you're talking about
something really deep when that when
people don't have the categories to
understand it or comprehend it like but
yet you have but you but you're very the
very system that you've got even created
like it a certain sense perfectly
explains right like right because it was
I did see that completely in retrospect
now I in fact something like the blue
church you know if you follow like
Jordan Paul's work in terms well yeah
the church is such a wonderful
articulation of the institutional
inertia infrastructure and logic
justification system that now flows
everything and this is so transformative
it's like the digital from non digital I
mean it really and the structure has no
idea so what in and this was happening
all the time individuals would see it
but there's no way that the system could
digest it and be transformed yeah yeah
so in a retrospect I see it but as when
I was twenty eight twenty nine and had
my dad inside me and wonder rose it was
not easy you know stuff it was that
whole you're alone and and I'm very
aware of that and I'm also very aware
the system tells me I'm a justifier yeah
yeah so it's a it was you know and then
so then I shifted like in 2000 I shifted
strategy and started writing and I was
like okay I have to figure out how to
write this thing you know it had this
image like in 2001 of the joint points
and I was learning I was getting
behavioral investment theory I had
justification and the tree of knowledge
and the influence matrix although I
didn't call it that at the time but I
didn't write had the life to mind point
clarified yeah okay got you yeah I
didn't have that Claire I didn't have
the right language for that and I was
actually on a clinical science listserv
yeah um and there was a guy who I in
retrospect very appreciated although I
was in a you know a lot of these
justifying battles with them back in the
days of Lister I'd get on there
right right and he was an advocate of BF
Skinner okay huge advocate of BF Skinner
and hostile to cognition and I had
digested Skinner from the vantage point
of economists okay yeah damn it's got
any at some level and I item
more to Watson and and Mike had some of
the stereotypes so then I engaged in
this really deep conversation mmm it's
gone and then was like well now I
actually have to learn Skinner
yeah yeah and I open up this books
collection of consequences okay by and
it's basically he's collected works best
pieces and one of the first page I
opened man is a function of three layers
of selection yeah selection behavioral
selection and selection ready do see
three layers that determine the human
behavioral process unfolds right okay
that's life mind and culture right right
totally yeah yeah yeah I was like
scanners look at Skinner's whole three
tier selection system is my life
emergent out of matter my diversion at a
culture called it's like I think culture
my income annihilation and culture
coming out of mine he's verbal selection
lines up with justification his operon
theory lines up with mind and his
recognition of evolutionary theory so
this is like oh my god and then I got
more and clear about why what his
philosophy was and how he totally you
know his philosophy of behaviors so that
was like in 2000 with that piece so then
I was like and then I collapsed that
into what called behavioral investment
theory and I saw how the system
assimilated integrated Skinner and the
 science functionalist of you okay
so then I that was my first paper then
then I had I could fuse the tree of
knowledge to show how we could go to
physics to biology relatively
well-organized
and make chaos right and then you and
then in American psychology at least you
can then say to most influential people
are Skinner and Freud once you consider
how diametrically opposed they are yeah
okay yeah and then psychology are you
gonna be a behavior it's like Skinner or
analysts like Freud and those super
influential with their
yeah well then I was like I can take
Skinner and link him here yeah if to
mine and I take Freud and put them here
right I have life mine culture on a
biopsychosocial right yeah we have the
whole thing comes online this cognitive
developmental view that a PHA and all
the sudden taking the extremes put them
in and align in a Wilsonian conciliate
there
bunch of all okay so and that's a damn
good paper I know I got that yeah the
review of general psychology that was
the other time when I was like okay now
when review of general psychology see
APA first journal blah blah blah you
know it's a reason to suck points not
super high journal it's very good
journal you know and I was like well
this is gonna get any leverage and it
did a little bit I got following that I
got some recognition I got to special
issues them get job at the journal and
you actually is this very interesting
place that actually was interested in
theory so I went job market yeah
everywhere I've been working with
actually Aaron Beck I got a job with
Aaron back for four years worked as his
right-hand man at the University of
Pennsylvania
right Aaron Beck who's been back up to
the back of like father of cognitive
therapy okay yes oh yeah not okay
cognitive yes so anyway you sometimes go
by know the guy the father of the mostly
living
Kaieteur sexually but in terms of
influence in psychology Pennsylvania
working for four years under him while I
was doing this so you know I was in the
midst of and I could have followed his
line and he actually hired me with
excitement about my theory but anyway so
anyway so then I was ready to get up and
I everywhere I went I had to I talked
about their suicide
study our empirical study on suicide
attempters that I ran that was my theory
so that's a whole another side of this
talk about I'm on the barrel in terms of
life ecology these are suicide attempt
Inner City Philadelphia really really
tough population or those my day job
working for back and I
to say about that and that reality so
then I published this and I had some
statue because I was at the University
of Pennsylvania and there were some
interest and I got to special issues I
got my job and I got to special issues
in uncle psychology and had a few
conferences and there was some momentum
in the mid 2000s
right there was interest in people
commented on it and I thought that we
might get
but then the inter this is when I ran
into the institutional problem everybody
has so many different reactions to it
yeah okay well this piece but I don't
like this piece I don't know I don't
apply and I don't know how to speak the
whole language so everybody sees it from
all of these different angles yeah okay
right yeah as such it couldn't leverage
the institutional it just would
dissipate because everybody's
experiencing different parts of it yeah
yeah it couldn't get coordinated around
it great right okay and and and I was
operating from a top-down basic hey I
have truth here's the true see the
arguments digest then go off and you
know I win yeah after that it sort of
fizzled and I started to reboot my so if
I became director of this doctoral
program at JMU which is combined
integrated produces psychological
doctors so clinicians and founders are
focused on an integrative theory right
up me in and when I gave my job talk in
2003 all the others were on peer achill
supported you know all the data from our
study how would I get a grant how would
I run research studies damn you they're
like tell us about your theory yeah yeah
man yeah so I night a job talk with no
data you know on ideas which is
unbelievably unheard of it G right ready
yeah and I went I called my dissertation
advisors receive as a behaviorist love
but a crusty old behaviors okay right
Langton Burt and he was like he would be
like you're never gonna get a job doing
theory and I got to call
[Laughter]
so that's the joys of one of my academic
fathers I got to say yeah totally
totally so and then I basically hunkered
down for 12 years I was building this
program and directed became to run in
2005 right ding the expression my soul
basically was inside the program
yeah right can I direct the prayer you
know I was already the institution but
this little microcosm and I did a good
job of it you know for I think the
program actually is led up to a lot of
the ideals and crafted a professional
identity very much around combined
integrated and this unified frame plate
of curry you know I was director so got
it right you know so you're like you're
a little like tech like like literally
do almost like a little bit of an
empirical test of exactly a whole really
a life practice test you know here's you
want to do I mean I'm always about
what's called ecological validity
that's that gets under emphasized by the
and we're experiment doesn't actually
work and what it consequences doesn't
have in the real world right ecology put
it in the ecology and see what the hell
happens right because it's a complex
dynamic system that you can't predict so
you got to drop it in there so yeah you
know that was that was part of the test
and you know you spoke to is my life so
my my whole life my family and my
children my you know you see it on the
bag on the garba
my job it's just you know once this
thing hit into my cells it just you know
just became all right well I just kind
of getting experience of that just you
know oh of having that opportunity watch
this in other people and in this system
and in a program that like and which I
was so I'm so glad how many different
levels you're here you're going out and
receiving in that like it's just really
what a beautiful opportunity so really I
was so thankful to find a place that
actually just you know the academic
psychology is
really academic psychology is just
basically in purest okay
yeah the practice domains are either
dominated by empiricism or you know very
few academic systems were set up yeah
really embrace me so it's very very
fortunate to come back to jam you write
those really there's a good run as the
director I stepped down voluntarily for
the director and started to explore and
actually it's a little bumpy because
outside the role of director and what's
happened my relationship with the
program actually went through less than
ideal people after I stepped off there
was I got into some clashes with systems
that were from a political vantage point
I got polarized a little bit okay
details but was sort of had some white
male dynamics magic experienced
movements that were so strongly
progressive you need to be sort of
intense and pushed back actually Jordan
Peters so Jordan Peterson place and this
because I had heard bad things about I
wasn't really you know through some of
the left and then I looked you know this
guy he's a really serious academic you
know yeah yeah and while his rhetoric is
more polarizing than rhetoric I was
under pressure and firmly to this day
believe that the mature psychological
position is to take him very seriously
and to appreciate what he represents
culturally as a psychologist fact that's
our obligation right any simplistic
narrative about what he is from either
side either just an boy narrative that
he's you know brilliant perfect or a oh
my god he's a complete Transpo
so I was actually bringing him in to say
we should study him yeah and we should
listen well giving him attention for
some you know and automatically made you
something
yeah now how I was on the right now I
was and that's so by where I was like
this is a great academic
Jannetty thrust a dialogue and then to
be pushed back and then I pushed back
and that's when so God you know because
people got pushed a little bit and that
which launched me into then into the
intellectual dark web and rebel wisdom
crap and yeah so 2018 and then I went to
in a Alexander bard as an intellectual
deep web I went to that and and a
modernism then I went into the meta
modernism world right and that's where I
hooked up with John Brubaker and was in
that context I saw a circling world yeah
jumped out of academia I realized that
for to me in retrospect the icon what I
now have my which is that the academic
psychology is basically a modernist
empiricist system well the practice of
psychology is a postmodern sort of
diversity multicultural system yeah yeah
and I'm a meta modernist basically and
you know an Internet of honors kind of
thinker and now including in
transcending ok
and I was bumping my head up against
sensibilities you know that were
institutionally organized print
sensibilities yeah get into the leading
edge of culture world of the John verb a
key and meta modern you know that's been
really freeing and feeling just feeling
much more at home yeah totally and so
like what you're doing now are you do
you have a teaching position or like
what's there I know I'm a full professor
so I did a nice thing you got a full
professor right I devoted so much
service and all of that I am you know
what he's humble teaching load and so my
scholarship and I'm sort of like I'm
writing a book my next updated book but
I'm I'm not interested in trying to go
to the conference's or publish and
mainstream terminal or the people that
have the get to see thinkers of the
world
hae-jin and dual although Steve Baker
now Jordan Peterson stuff but uh you
know the in other words I'm no longer
trying to bang my head up against the
institution
yeah I'm basically like actually my
world is the leading edge of culture
it's metamodel role right we're clear
entice people real to tional
infrastructures of the blue church of
the century yeah I'm gonna be up to the
speed right century and to the extent
that they are we're gonna drive off a
cliff
that's like Daniel smackin murderer and
some of those folks tell us area you
know the capitalistic system that we did
was brilliant and elevating us yeah
turning mother nature into a human
technology in a very dangerous way yeah
yeah so so what so I was I'm curious now
like what's it like kind of coming it
out of AK like out of academia and
talking about your work like here with
John on YouTube but the stoah like
what's that like what's been like just
sit with people and actually rather than
try to make the case academically inning
what person I tell you the academic
structure especially if it's sensibility
style range see a presentation in the
academic structure here is like well
what about have you read this and
usually the answer is now yeah actually
great right totally
but but the culture this culture okay so
the Kairos of the moment in this
cultures everyone already says wow the
blue church is not up to speed so this
schema are hunting for more sense making
systems yeah yeah and the sensibilities
of the people that got here they know
that found themselves in this culture
more that's in this particular sort of
meta modern sensibility way right so
we're all sort of looking and I mean
this tree of knowledge thing is weird so
if you pay attention to tree him up yes
when I built the tree of knowledge
within six weeks I knew this I knew this
21st century was gonna be really intense
okay yeah okay
why yeah how come okay if you understand
the structure so you get the emergence
out of energy comes matter is
complicated stuff yeah
and then in the line of life what
happens is the emergence of a complexity
building feedback loop that builds
complex adaptive systems like maples
okay wait
cells are these self-organizing complex
adaptive systems that have formation
storage not ishutin processing inside
the cell and that network communication
between cells yeah yeah yeah it's that
coordinated functional flow of
information where it sustains the life
dimension of complexity right right
right right all right so then that's why
it's a qualitatively different dimension
yeah why it's a different cone right and
the change from life from chemistry to
biology is fundamentally different than
just physics yeah is a jump yeah this is
a qualitative job right then you then
you go for three billion years and you
do in the next jump through the gabion
explosion and you get to mind and you
cuz now you get brains pulling cells
together yeah to create a whole
coordinated body right right all right
today an animal that's like a cell and
they're like the nerve is like the DNA
yeah yeah yeah great and then you got an
information processing an animal to
animal communication that gives rise to
that yeah a mental dimension right okay
right so then you get language okay
which is symbolic information processing
in here and communication between people
mm-hmm right linking up our mind right
okay right right so here you get a jump
over to culture yeah so every one of
these dimensions of complexity is tied
together by a novel information
processing system networked together
through a new communication system
yeah yeah yeah right right okay now what
did we do in the 20th century we built
computers right cute electronic
information yeah an Internet that we
started to network it all together yeah
right and we're starting to information
interface with them there's an Internet
of Things and we're building inside
yeah was artificial Big Data computer
systems and Ray boom the next dimension
of complexity yeah on the doorstep
yeah right right and it's getting fat
like each is it's getting faster and
faster and faster right the first one
took 10 billion years to go ahead bang
to life right there was like three
billion years to mind yeah this was like
700 million years to get to culture that
has been a hundred thousand years all
right
yeah fifty years and now we're just on a
whole 100 year prize right right holy
 and you're right on the doorstep so
it's like we were so what this is so
what this showed me is like mountain
jellyfish that were existed right before
the Cambrian explosion they had all
these distributed neural nets moving
brains and organized body systems
screams explosion happens and boom you
get cut brains and complex bodies and
then the thing mind yeah yeah yeah but
we have a distributed neural networks a
system equipped with computers and then
the internet were laying down the
nervous system right I'm a brain yet
yeah right so it's like the 21st century
is gonna see the beginning of the brain
that there's no launches into the meta
cultural dimension yeah a world okay
yeah what do you like do you have a
sense of like when you imagine what that
starts to look like and the kinds of
things that start to happen like I can't
I can't imagine you have not like all
right like that's the Wow that's the
that's the that's the event horizon that
you know you learn to speak the tree of
knowledge language you know in set I
often talk about writing the wait yeah
so writing the way means you're on the
cusp of the present yeah recognizing
that you're this unfolding wave of
probability right okay right at the wave
of possibility yeah okay we're so that's
what and now you're sitting at this cusp
of interface layer and that's what
that's what I knew would be coming down
the road now I didn't know when and blip
and
when I actually then started to jump out
of culture out of my academic culture
into the new culture ready and heard
Jordan Hall and Daniel Stockton Berger
and all these people talking about game
B yeah
and the dangers then I realized that the
old system was getting outpaced by the
digital so quickly yeah yeah yeah that
actually the teetering of the top and by
the way every one time you go through
these it's dangerous all right yeah
the right amount of complexity has to
happen right all together at the right
amount for us you get chaos on the one
hand or hyper order on the other that
locks it down yeah have a complex
adaptive dialectic between order and
chaos possession the very that's a fifth
point is threading a needle yeah yeah
well I love that was coming later but
man once I jumped out and looked around
at the structure of the world I was like
oh god we might be right on the cusp of
it yeah right right and then I read into
there's this unbelievable paper at least
for me at the level of magical you talk
about the spiritual leading edge there's
there's a you know that singularity from
oh yeah yeah the venom in which he
posted in 1945 right well there's a
Russian theorist okay who argued that
curse walls math was wrong there's a
whole nother layer of exponential
acceleration and what he does he finds
an entirely different data set on the
curve of complexity from Russian theory
that empathy that has different events
okay that are happening yes two totally
different events
okay of complexity Russia inventions and
developments and discoveries and Western
yeah well these lines on this on his new
ex cross okay
the singularity which is the ultimate
limit function of the exponential if you
follow the rate yeah yeah theyíve got
regression lines on the one hand it's
like point 994 okay and on the other
regressions 0.996 write one line crosses
the singularity in 2029 and the other in
2027
yeah it's that okay right
so there is this kind of complexity
regression line that closes it from
Russian data point says United States
date points and crosses out around 2028
all right yes that would basically point
to the center joint point
oh my god Wow eight years away right
great talk about cosmic coordinates man
yeah like whoa okay such a trip that's
such a favorite when I saw that and then
I learned about the singularity and then
I learned about that singularity and
that's the digital social techno point
okay that's an adaptive observation
distributed right limit Li that's the
brain medical then emerge of the 21st
century yeah yeah and do you have any
sense of what that's gonna look like do
you have any does your imagination go
into the into that that world at all my
yes although I was the first thing I
will learn a new word a little while ago
by Stewart Kaufman ego I've read a book
by him called the unprecedented so I
love the principle of the thing has
whatever its if it's going to grow it
has to go between the or the dialectic
of order of chaos yeah yeah you guys I
have a principle of complex that
updation it's gonna be found there right
and when you identify that K you can
then say well what are they there are a
lot of chaotic parameters that would be
nightmares obviously a nuclear work law
or we can have an Internet
electronic event like a pulse from a Sun
and we'll actually fried all entropy
will pull the whole thing pretty easy we
can kill ourselves in the heartbeat
there's no law that says has to happen
okay it it's on the knife edge of order
and complexity to build an egg and
trophic increase
yeah very so yeah so there's the chaos
side to thinking crashing firm right
there's praise too much instability
there's too much change the order
structures that are organizing the flow
of reefs
versus an energy breakdown and we
control and I see that as a possibility
in fact over the last my my family was
getting sick and tired like actually
global civilization collapse yeah
now of course we're like actually yeah
maybe crazy okay cuz it's so crazy after
all
okay right so anyway you know you have
the chaos and then you have okay so the
is when you have the opportunity for a
snake the opportunity like for 1984 yeah
when 1984 was you know when I first read
that I was like how do you do that you
know how do you go back and control all
the information you know what things
written in print yeah you know that
would be a mechanical trouble to be
already really have to have physical
control if you have the internet yeah if
you if you're the center of control the
internet then you can have a
governmental control of everything
you create any virtual video you want
we're not far away from having an
undetectable virtual video so if you're
a dissident boom just creative yeah
right locked in you know be like our own
little matrix nightmare movie great so
so that's the terror is this is the idea
that somebody some brain is gonna then
use us as manipulative little neurons
okay and then our complete pawns
Liat lack all free will right either
blow it up or get absolutely controls
yeah great great so you have quarter of
a mile is somebody there's that that
there's a there's a organization called
Miri here in in in in the Bay Area asks
where I live and they're they're
basically they've been worrying they
just basically have like some of the
smartest people like some of the most
socially awkward
like totally like but but in the inn and
he took actually took my circling course
and they all they do is they think about
they worry about AI right and they're
all in and it's interesting because the
level of the level of intelligence right
in the level of thinking that to even be
able to perceive that they're like it's
just it's just crazy
and he is like you know um the owner of
this he you ask him how he's doing and
it's based on where all this is at right
cuz he really does feel they're on the
side of you know this thing turns and
it's there's we just don't have any
say-so and so he's like they're
anticipating well how do you do it maybe
you invent it first and you put any test
it but I think that one of the things
about this is just fascinating to me is
one one it like when my imagination goes
into that event horizon right like and
is is it there's this way about about
the more technological things get the
faster they disappear right and and
people don't realize that that it's like
that when you get up and you look at
your phone that's the first thing you
like literally we think conceptually
inside of our calendar right like yes it
becomes and then we start to think with
it and we don't notice it by definition
it disappears right yes where's before
it be like most of the time you know you
would like first of all you're in a role
that was given to you from most of the
things around you like you either made
or you knew how to fix and it had
everything had there's more of this kind
of you know like it had more resistance
yeah oh there's like less and less
resistance between things but it's got
this connection with disappearing so it
makes you make sense to me that like we
would if something like the horizon
event horizon line were crossed I doubt
we'd even notice it like right right I
mean it's not like I mean you know as
somebody says
guy turns purple and all of a sudden
it's it's something and they don't many
people don't know exactly what they're
Ben they believe we're talking about
singularity evangelize yeah knowledge
gives you an idea and basically what it
is there is it what people have matched
mapped is the evolution of complexity to
go away out of line and that's
transformed right and then there'll be
another operative trans yeah so there
will be and then basically that line
it's its limit and then there's another
line on the other side yeah so that is
and how long friends I mean yeah they
are it's the artificial intelligence
that is the computational infrastructure
hope this met a dimension that's right
okay and then it's the inner or
interface with it
and then a coal our whole issues we have
to have a wise interface with it right
yeah why interface which is not
something I'm seeing no that's the error
and that's what the term trying to get
out there is and the reason is of course
what we did was with stem stem is
science math and technology it's all
those hyper hasta autistic spectrum
folks believably good at the analytic
justification that's all that there is
and built technology that enables that
to be realized right the courtroom and
courtyard and human relating piece yeah
yeah totally and that's enough that's
where all of the morality happens that's
all right it's funny it's like it does
seem like it does seem like like yoomin
I thou it's the one thing that you can't
optimize right like it actually it's
it's this place where you can't collapse
distances I don't know it's actually
it's in confronting your other nests
then that I you have to grow through
something to to to feel the mystery of
you right amen that's a fullness yeah so
the if we can create a digital culture
that honors the levels beneath it yeah
hey that's what will create a stable
honoring sustainable values right okay
and the danger is is that if this thing
is constructed without being anchored it
will tear off become a god on its own or
multiplicity of gods and we will have
created by children who don't understand
yeah system of the gods I okay and then
you know then you order chaos hell you
know that thing will then rain upon us
yeah right and so this is like one of
the ways that for me I thought about
what's happening right like right with
this like this conversation
mmm-hmm there's one in a few places and
I then I can see that where technology
has brought forth something it's
fundamentally not technological and made
it more available right like like so so
for example all of the all the people
that you're talking about the
intellectual dark web right it's
interesting because I don't know how
these people would have found each other
otherwise no this is the potential this
is the owner this system gives us so
many look at it I mean you know call you
up they collapse space-time you have a
real experience of you're right and I'll
just hit see yeah you know and then I
think and we'll have had this wonderful
connection yeah hey put it up and have
it as examples or whatever unbelievable
okay right so that's what we need to
figure out how to cultivate yeah fitness
so for me what we're looking at I've
defined Thomas Brookman talks about meta
crises okay the leader in the emerge
thing I characterize them as follows so
there's the digital globalization
meta-crisis son okay and that's what's
changing everything so the blue church
is totally archaic and then what are we
going to evolve into and it's not going
to topple us are we gonna grow we have
the tech no environmental crisis which
is the way they were chewing up the
earth again you know seven you know plus
billion of us that are pulling the
technology out and how the hell are we
gonna manage that without serious damage
and third so those are major structural
issues but then we have the human
problems of meaning mental health crisis
yeah so so what we need I love that you
have Rafael behind you right yeah so
what we need and this went from this is
where I really come into the equation in
China we need an Enlightenment 2.0 quick
yeah that reboots the Academy yeah roots
our socio-political court-yard right
waiting right okay yeah so that as this
thing grows we all are not know what we
need as human being that's right
totally and we can start the sea you
know it's one of the things that's been
interesting for me and starting to get
because because we started circling and
I got into Heidegger and I've been kind
of the one that's been the like working
out that what's going on here and
mapping it out and distinctions and
stuff um but pretty much like I for the
most part I really hadn't had much many
people to talk to at this level right
and so when I started this podcast it
was just like well I thought it because
like interesting to have a podcast and
have people on interested people on and
then do something like an interview or
like a circle but then I started like
actually talking to people that have
actually read some of the same books
I've read and write all this rigor
around it and it is blossomed to this
whole other thing that I'm still inside
of going on this ride it's really quite
ecstatic but but at one of the things
I've noticed is that you know it's it's
like for example this is in a it's like
with you like see like seeing you right
in a very real way he's really seeing
your ideas and it's seeing the being
right that's called forth and those
ideas right like it's it's uh is that
there's people it seems like the people
that are are can start to address these
problems right
there's a whole world of people like
that that that are just that's right
right this is and this is it's it's
figuring out that network and
distributing it and then and making sure
that we stays connected with as many
people as possible don't become isolated
yeah totally the attentional systems in
a swing sort of way into our communities
yeah the systems is you know that's that
because and I do believe that people
it's because I think certainly for
myself you know to find your way here
means that you have have to have
something inside of you where you see
the convention you know the simple past
is following a convention you know I
work went back you know he's already
established you know they've done his
stuff and then done his stuff and and
done it's tough stuff because that you
know the the line of institutional
status right but then when I would have
been 40 and you would have asked me you
know how great is cognate there Bo
greggers great no my heart would have
basically that's because my father Beck
is telling me how great it is yeah I
internalize the institution and I'm
falling Wow
well those of us that are post
conventional you know outside the
convention are finding our way here
we're being led by something else right
right and that thing and that's that
thing is I've noticed that I was talking
with jobs like a number of other people
the other day about like you know one of
the biggest things that people talk
about encircling it's so life-changing
for them is this experience of what they
call being seen right being deeply see
is this thing that is it it's not
obvious actually what that is right and
I it's not it's not I think what I think
and this is what I think really
listening to somebody is it's you do
with it's not when I it's not what I
understand what you understand about
yourself right it's it's more like it's
more like you have the experience of
being seen when when somehow
I can kind of hear the thing that's
beyond the horizon that's been that
you're it's so background for you that
you've been in response to and we can
start to articulate that that's the
moment right
we're actually it's a trick it's like
like right well what
what I would say that that happened so
you know it's Annie Annie you're trying
to do this and other kinds of scenarios
when when you get that moment when
you're experiencing when you're able to
give it to somebody else
yeah yeah you're seeing the true-self
event horizon yeah okay you know in
other words you're seeing inside of that
person a particular aspect of their
first that they may have intuited but
even there there couldn't see nor I know
but it's like you sense that potential
and then you you know mirror it right
then you validate it through the your
seat their knowing in value that aspect
of them yeah you bring it into being
through you and then they feel it you
know yeah no there's a whole organizing
structure totally and it's so it happens
too it's interesting it's like it's like
yet me seeing you but it's really like
we're seeing you beyond you constituting
you and that becomes a light for me
that's like the experience it's like I
do I go through say I walk out changed
after that like right to me that's like
the vision of the third other it's this
idea of the I talked a lot about the
concept of God you know this idea of a
loving agape that as we the mutual
relational value that's experience then
it just moves into the social field yeah
you know you know it's the cumulative
iterative process of that jumps it up on
the one hand or what happens you know
when you see a polarized hell scenario
it just tears it all down and you just
feel the design of the tension and
everybody it's more than the negative
exchange its negative through everybody
yeah yeah or the reverse when it's it's
cumulative and then through everybody so
it's just this elevation great totally
yeah because isn't it kind of is also
Vista level of like and this is where I
think and what we've been talking about
with dialo goes where it's like having
that kind of intimacy going on right but
where actually you move into like a
metacognitive right right we're we're on
some level you start to like this that
you start to
how do you put this it's like you start
to feel into and direct almost like it's
almost like touching into the logos
directly right on some level where you
have these moments where everything
starts to look you realize the thing
that's been having the conversation the
whole time but that would be where
everything's fractal and that that in an
walking feel spiritual right totally in
like the neurology and all the things
that you're enacting in having those
conversations in the flow spaces and
also and here's the important part is
like it matters whether or not you're
looking at reality right and that you're
and you're aware that you don't know
whether or not you're looking at reality
and that you're looking at you're
looking at what's real and that that's
the feedback loop right that's the thing
that is more clear our vulnerability yes
well this is we have to be very good
what is it cult basically but a call to
something that essentially insists on
that ideology and then has practices
that get people into the ritual of the
ideology which may then give an
experiential system but man if that
correspond to reality
yeah look right cliff so yes I'm a
scientist at heart you don't have taker
point better be you know and that's
beauty of where you put enlightenment
2.0 in my choice there's actually no oh
okay
- Blair of the structure so we go all
the way down to the quantum yeah yeah
and then back to Big Bang and all the
way up into and above I know and concept
of God I know and future singularity and
all of these concepts you know about how
we might be able to realize you know
lies what's relevant in the 21st century
right now right so great talking to you
so talking with you yeah I really
appreciate I really appreciate our
conversation I have to I have to get
going now yep that's us we've been going
from maybe I think yeah yeah how is this
for you great man I really I had a sense
you know listening to you so yeah
circling rocks man
the the opportunity and share and yeah
we think that were you know like I said
20 years ago or whatever is like hey you
know now we're getting to the cusp in
the Congress at the moment you gotta
network folks together um golfing you
sort of a Close Encounters of the Third
Kind I don't know if you know the movie
but people see the mountain you know
folks are starting to see the mountain
and weave them together and and
distribute it with wisdom well then then
the evolution through the fit joint
point happens right right on let's get
and let's make let's let's make your
work more more let's get it out there
wonderful I really appreciate the
opportunity yeah much love okay bye-bye