howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to Jim
ruts show com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
is Jack Murphy writer speaker and
podcaster
hey Jim how you doing glad to be here
I'm doing pretty good all things
considered glad to have you I think this
is gonna be an interesting conversation
definitely Jack is the author of
Democrat to deplorable why 9 million
Obama voters ditched the Democrats and
embraced Donald Trump he's a podcaster
and he's a founder of the liminal order
Jack's got a BA in economics from George
Mason University and a master's from
Georgetown School of Foreign Service
that's pretty high tone at Georgetown he
studied international finance and
international affairs
how many international affairs did you
manage to have over the last 20 years
Jack has built homes schools
institutions and communities we're gonna
explore Democrat to deplorable in some
depth and then we're going to talk about
the liminal order and other work that
Jack is doing the area of social change
but what links it all together at least
in my mind is I you know spent my usual
10 hours getting ready for this
interview is the life Jack has lived in
some ways typical some ways untypical
I don't often do this I usually skip
over the bio but I think in your case
you know five minutes you know I was a
tiny baby born X and bring us up to the
current day might actually be helpful
well it's a that's a tough question
because part of my whole job and my
whole sort of experience is telling my
personal story over and over and over
again and it seems to have new twists
all the time so the the short story is
that I haven't been an entrepreneur
generally in my whole life started
businesses when I was young
kid worked as a real estate developer an
independent sort of construction and
building expert in the 2000s here in
Washington DC and then after that when
the real estate market turned in two
thousand eight and nine I have been
working with charter schools in in DC
helping them find their own real estate
facilities and so I actually leveraged
or no leverage I pivoted into charter
school leadership I started off as a
real estate consultant for charter
schools than a CEO Oh a CFO and then
eventually I was executive director and
then I became a turnaround expert in
charter schools in fact I would be hired
to turn around some of the worst
performing education institutions in the
District of Columbia and we had
tremendous success in fact I didn't do
it just one time I did it twice some
could say even did it three different
times and I had a great career there I
ended up moving up to the regulator in
Washington DC the District of Columbia
public charter school Association and I
worked there and while I'm working there
I'm also discovering my writing side my
political commentary side my
investigative side and I had been
writing I had a blog and was tweeting
and and I was working on my book
Democrats a deplorable at the time and I
ended up getting caught up in an Tifa
all right online network you know wars
and an Tifa decided that I was a racist
and a Nazi and so they got me doxed and
fired from my job at the public charter
school board and it was all done in a
very public way they ran a public
campaign on me where they revealed my
pen name and pointed to my my crazy
writings about questioning whether
sanctuary cities were a good idea or
questioning some of the more radical
elements of feminism and
intersectionality they said I'm a Nazi
they said they saw me at a at an
all-right rally one time when in fact I
was just there taking pictures of the
antifa and all right fighting each other
they used that to say that I was an
associate of Richard Spencer and a bad
guy Jason Kessler
all of which was completely untrue and
so I got caught up in this online
network conflict this sort of 4G war
that's ongoing all the time I got I got
cancelled Doc's shamed fired from my job
reputation torn up and and and set a
fire in front of my eyes
I got banned from coaching Little League
with my son because the antique accont
acted my little league board they
basically went through every element of
my life and tried to destroy it so my
sort of Normie career got nuked and I
was working and writing at the time so I
just decided to double down on that I
published the book did a speaking tour
around the country even went to
Evergreen State College to present my
book and talk to students there and then
a year ago in June I started the liminal
order and the liminal order is a I'm
sure we'll get to it but it is an all
men's organization designed to be a
response to the crazy social justice
intersectionality critical theory
warfare that's going on out there but
not in a / public way but rather in a
let's live well and dedicate ourselves
to our own shared values kind of way and
so that's what I've been dedicated to
now full-time for the last couple of
years and things continue to grow and
expand and we've got members 200 members
from all over the world actually and
things continue to grow and and the
interest is very high and so this is my
full-time job now Jim talking to people
like you doing my podcast working with
the membership and trying to advance the
cause of truth and sense making and
understanding while also promoting you
know just basically like a traditional
sense of positive masculinity that's
that's what I'm doing every day and I'm
loving it yeah this is this modern world
and both you and me are playing in right
nobody gave either of us permission to
do what we do right you know that's the
amazing thing about this world the
traditional gatekeepers don't
necessarily like it right no definitely
no but they can't do anything about it
for - or at least not directly but as
you point out they can make you pay the
cost but hey if you're a tough person
what do you care right yeah one thing
that I noticed when I was reading your
book was
your DC area connections I resonated
with that I grew up in the DC area when
I was a little kid we lived in Anacostia
southeast DC over on Texas Avenue and
then when I was two we moved Prince
George's County my dad was a DC cop
worked his way up one things you
mentioned and in the thing that I just
grinned about was some of the local DC
isms like go-go music and Mambu sauce
and I remember one of the things we
really loved was getting fried shrimp
with Mambu sauce at the shrimp boat
northeast DC back in the days right near
their 14th police precinct back in the
day when my dad had his first command
job as shift commander over there I'm us
about 1965 something like that and DC is
an interesting place you know we think
of it as the seat of government etc but
it's also a city that has its own
culture which is kind of cool yeah
people forget that Washington DC is a
city with its own culture and its own
permanent residents there's people come
in from out of town all the time and
they're like DC so transient and
whatever and I'm thinking to myself
everyone that I'm friends with everyone
that I know here was basically born here
and lived here maybe maybe it's no
surprise that most of my local
associates are like real estate agents
hair salon operators local lawyers you
know people real estate developers
people that that are that would build
the city that all these transient people
come to you so there is definitely
history and roots here in DC and I and I
love living here for the most part but
it's becoming increasingly difficult to
justify it in my mind really mighty
expensive for what it is these days yeah
and the part of PG County I grew up in
it was you know mostly solid
working-class folks I think in our
little neighborhood you know you think
about electricians and plumbers meet
cutters we had a baker we had a couple
of cops a couple of schoolteachers etc
the demographics later so much to my
surprise I realized that half the adults
were high school dropouts but they were
all solid and respectable folks right I
think the divorce rate might have been
10% something like that maybe lower a
lot of my old friends who I'm still in
regular contacts are just like the kind
of people you talk about one's a
surveyor another one had a bread route
that he owned where he delivered bread
the grocery stores
were small-scale home improvement
contractors a couple of them made it
into the larger side of construction
other one was a heavy equipment guy so
yeah those kind of people those are the
kind of people I grew up with and I
think there's you know kind of bedrocks
of America yeah well you know what's
interesting in Washington that that sort
of middle class has been hollowed out in
the city for sure it's really polarized
you know on one side of the park you've
got two very wealthy that 1% the top 1%
you know your think tank people your
McKinsey people your government
lobbyists and defense contractors and
then on the other side of the park it's
you know there's a lot of poverty and
there's definitely a lot of a lot of
hunger and a lot of poor educational
outcomes for our students as well so
it's a it's a it's a city of polar
opposites and of dichotomies of black
and white it was predominantly an
african-american city up until just
recently it's like the first time in its
history that it was a it's now a
majority non african-american at least
since for a long time for sure let's
jump into your book democrat to
deplorable so i'll put a marker on the
ground and before we hop in and say i
personally kind of did a reverse journey
i start out in life and a pretty
conservative cop military family and we
had some other reasons we were
politically conservative my parents like
were radicalized in favor of Goldwater
and I was myself a pretty radical
Republican up until 1991 with the fall
of communism which was my number one
issue and I've gradually drifted towards
a much more radical view in fact I've
now drifted way past the Democrats into
a space of thinking about how to
radically reconstruct society on a much
more bottoms-up
localist and egalitarian basis so be
very interesting to explore your journey
in the opposite direction but anyways I
started reading the book and I always do
read the books here fairly carefully it
seemed to me that one of your initial
radicalizing experiences was your
experience with family court family law
and the difficulties fathers in
particular faced in the impact of those
institutions maybe you could tell us a
little bit about that yeah you know in
2009 I got divorced and it was the most
difficult decision I ever made and I
looked
on it and try to analyze it actually
quite quite a bit it started me down a
path of discovery of understanding that
more female relationships
the family unit the perception of father
is the perception of masculinity all
these things were in question and I had
no idea really you know I got married in
2002 divorced in 2009 and a lot changed
in that time period from 2002 to 2009
not the least of which was internet
social media dating apps etc but also
was the increasing rise of a sense that
masculinity was something that needed to
be dealt with not embraced and it is
around that time that there was an
increased activity in the sort of
critical theory intersectionality social
justice world that's began to interject
this idea into our society that
masculinity was a bad thing that needed
to be eradicated because male power
masculinity is a source of male power
male power is the source of the
patriarchy the patriarchy is oppressive
every societies been patriarchal in
order to free the people we must end the
source of male power and that's a to
attack boys and masculinity and male
behavior
I hadn't even known about that until I
got divorced and started to experience
and read the stories of other men all
across the country who had just been
battling and fighting for the chance to
just be a father with their own children
and I began to understand what what it
meant to have no-fault divorce and how
that became a one-sided contract that
was only obligation for the man but
benefits for the woman and it just
became increasingly obvious to me that
there was a real issue and a real
disconnect in a real battle that was
being waged against men and it sounded
crazy to say that at the time and I'll
be honest I felt and I and I did sort of
populate sort of you know darker more
extreme well it seemed to be extreme
sort of conspiracy you know just the
corners of the internet and we sounded
like radical crazy people saying that
there was
attack on masculinity but now fast
forward to 2019 when the American psyche
a psychological Association comes out
and basically pathologized his
masculinity they say that they say that
competition and risk-taking and and it
attempt to control your emotions all
these things are actually toxic
behaviors and they need to be eradicated
from from little boys you know they made
a public declaration that there is
actually an attack in a war on
masculinity and now in 2020 I just did a
podcast with James Lindsay who wrote a
book recently called cynical theories
where he explains how directly in the
literature coming from post-modernism to
today the attack on masculinity is not
only something for that's real but it's
actually a central part of the strategy
of the people have taken over our
institutions taking over corporations
Human Resources Department media etc so
what started for me through a painful
experience of getting divorced sent me
down a rabbit hole or I started pulling
on a thread and I've been pulling on
that same thread ever since Jim and
that's led me to this conversation right
here I wanted to learn more I wanted to
understand what was disrupting our
mating and dating markets what was
disrupting the bedrooms of America what
was disrupting the family unit what was
disrupting marriage and I kept pulling
on that thread and pulling on that
thread and Here I am today still pulling
on the same thread but under now talking
about issues that are critical to
humanity to society to the future
historical historical ideas you know the
most important conversations that we can
have today I think and so it's been a
fascinating journey for me you know some
people would call that being radicalized
you know but for me is really just
opening my eyes and beginning and
investigation and a process that's now
gone on damn near ten years and and like
there's still more to go and there's
still more to do so I'm actually on one
hand you know it's silly didn't silly
its weird thing to say like oh I feel
vindicated now that the war on men is
publicly stated and vindicated that you
know there's obvious evidence that
intersectionality and social justice
critical theory and stuff has is an in
fact
has has corrupted our system because you
know there's no joy in that but at the
same time you know it does give give it
a little bit extra wind behind my back
they keep going because things that
people once thought were crazy now are
just plainly obvious to the eye and I
feel like it's my mission and duty to
keep pulling on that string and to see
where it goes our game be world we talk
about that first experience where you
start to see through the matrix right
you realize that this world that's been
presented to you in which so many people
just follow their nose through life day
to day well guess what people it's kind
of manufactured bullshit yeah and with
effort you can see through it
yeah and it sounds like that was your
radicalizing moment let me read a quote
to you and then I'll give you a
follow-up you said marriage is good for
babies and women but for men it's a
risky deal with enormous downside choose
your partner wisely you know my take on
that is you know as any good social
operating system has to be good at
taking care of women and babies you know
one of my touch points for many ideas
reclaim when I was younger was Robert
Heinlein never read any Heinlein not
that I can recall at the moment sir
you should I'll give you a couple s but
he's a kind of libertarian some people
would call him right-wing science
fiction writer from the 50s and the 60s
he always made the huge point that the
first duty of any society's take care of
the women and children right however to
your point if it's now tremendous
downside risk for the man to do his
moral duty which is to take care of
women and children then what do you
expect that the marriage rates are way
down into my mind one of the most
screwed up parts of our current society
I'm sure I'll get some complaints about
this I don't really give a damn is that
the majority of births to mothers who
don't have a four-year college degree
are now out of wedlock that's across all
races you know even does it matter that
much my income as it turns out you know
unless you're a four-year college
graduate with really really good career
opportunities the downside of marriage
has gotten so big that people just
aren't doing it and even in the
four-year college graduate world
marriages are happening later and later
or not at all and we don't have that
basic family unit how the heck are we
going to raise children correctly
yeah well you know obviously I don't
disagree with the notion that we need to
take care of our women and children
that's something that's been part and
parcel to being humanity in humanity
forever and that's also part and parcel
of being a men and masculinity that's
what we're built to do we're bigger and
stronger and more aggressive and more of
a you know likely to take risks that's
our job is to protect what I what I want
to see is to have the incentives lined
up to motivate both men and women into
the proper outcome so like when a guy
like Jordan Peterson starts talking
about enforced culturally enforced
monogamy which you know when he brought
that up it's just sent off a firestorm
because people couldn't comprehend that
culturally enforced is something
entirely different than you know
government enforced Wow but there there
were distinct advantages to having a
very you know secure and predictable
family life it's good for the parents
it's good for the children it's good for
society and then the incentive structure
changed and so when men are
disincentivized from creating families
and from leading families this is a bad
thing this is a bad thing for society in
general and over time the negative
effects of that will be compounded I
think and I think it's a good analogy
also for our political system our
economic systems globalization it's such
a the the systems that we had in the
past are broken and as we continue to
feed into the same system we keep
getting increasingly larger messes and
and more broken outcomes instead of you
know trying to wanting to get the
outcome that we desire we're actually
doubling down on these systems and
getting more negative outcomes but yet
we haven't taken the time to revise the
system or change the incentive
structures or to make structural changes
we just keep hoping that the outcomes
are gonna be different even though we
keep doing the same thing and in that
the definition of insanity doing the
same thing and expecting a different
outcome right indeed it is one of the
things that well part of your journey
I'll actually read a quote new tribes
can be found online when I begin
learning about the new dating scene how
to meet someone and what to do
afterwards that is one of the very
interesting ways that the response is
coming to some of these dysfunctional
social trends is because we're free to
organize online we
are able to find the others and and
start doing things you and I both know
Peter Limburg for instance who runs the
stoah but before we started that he
wrote one of the most influential essays
to my mind over the last couple of years
the mimetic Tribes of culture war 2.0
and as usual on the show we'll have
links to that and to Jack's book into
his liminal order and various other
things on our episode page so be sure to
check that out it gym rat show calm but
anyway in his mimetic tribes and this
was in 2018 so it's a little out of date
now to the ones he listed where the
manosphere
and the men's rights movement would you
describe those as the tribes you found
online or was it something a little
different yeah first first of all that
essay by Peter is fantastic and I really
like I liked working with Peter I was
myself on the stole one time and had a
had a tremendous experience I really
respect what he's doing there and that
essay was certainly influential and will
go down as an excellent piece of
historical documentation for the time
period that we found ourselves in 2015
to 2018 2019 or so
yes manosphere is is what I discovered
which you know short-handed people will
say it's men getting together to share
notes right it's a it was a time for men
to come together online and to actually
share the little secrets that they've
been keeping inside you know little
issues they've had with their wives or
experiences that they had in dating or
how they figured out how to take care of
themselves or self and make
self-improvement
it was a chance for men to congregate in
a way that offered them privacy and then
an anonymity and an opportunity to
actually share and be a little bit more
empathetic and vulnerable than they
would have been ordinarily because you
know there's no real online community
without sharing right you have to
actually put yourself out there and
communicate and that takes a little
element of vulnerability which is an
interesting thread to actually consider
when it comes to masculinity and man
spaces but yes that manosphere
area was where I started to learn about
all those issues which have led me to
you know decentralized networks and
online communities etc men's right
activists not exactly my cup of tea
because I find that there's a sense of
victimology within that within that
sphere but I'll be honest I haven't
spent too much time with them my my
ethos has always been in the people that
have followed me and have evolved into
the lumina order are people that are
willing to be independent Auto
regulating you know self-improving
constantly reforming themselves
constantly improving themselves people
dedicated to self-improvement people
dedicating themselves to adding new
tasks or new talents and new skills and
new capabilities people who are
dedicated to quieting the mind you know
strengthening the body figuring out ways
to give back and contribute and build
community so that was that was what I
took away from from the manosphere which
was all those things plus just an
understanding of male-female dynamic so
that I had not ever considered because
no one no one's passing though that
knowledge down my dad didn't sit down
and teach me about evolutionary
psychology and evolutionary biology my
dad didn't sit down and explain the real
nature of relationships between men and
women perhaps because he had no idea but
because the world had become so
radically different through technology
the the problems and relationships were
exacerbated and the solutions also
became available online so it was a
really fascinating dynamic place to be
and I will always look back on that time
where I wrote in and spent time in that
sphere as valuable and important but you
know for me that was just like a
Waystation that was just a momentary
pause where I figured out how to get
myself back together after the divorce
how to get my mind right how to get my
body right how to build a community of
people that saw the world similarly how
to form new relationships how to build
healthy relationships with the you know
your love interests and then you know
since then I have definitely you know
moved on it's been it's been a few years
now since I think I've really spent too
much time in that arena and now we're
reaching just an entirely new audience
by talking
these universal themes you and I have in
common
decentralized networks game B what's a
future gonna look like and all these
things are tied together with critical
social justice theory and and
intersectionality and VOC ISM and all
that because we're trying to get down to
a sense of truth and we're trying to get
down to a sense of what works and so
that's been the same ethos for me coming
out of the manosphere and into this
which is like what's going on what are
the problems how can we fix it what do
we know that will work currently and
what can we do in the future to make
things better and I think that that's
the that's the common ground where you
and I have have right here and other
people like Jordan Hall and John rabe
that I talked to quite a bit all also
have the same sets and the same goals
and so it's a you know another
interesting decentralized network theory
which is you know when you have a common
goal we have different backgrounds we
may have other goals that aren't aligned
but we do have a common goal in figuring
out these emerging networks how to
design for them how to design for
emergence how to participate in them how
to foster them what is the power what
are understanding what the power of
networks are gonna be in the future and
so that's you know that's pull on the
thread from the manosphere and I end up
here talking to you about these issues
so I know that they're related and I
know that they're connected and I know
that they're important and I'm happy to
be having these conversations with folks
like you and others so that we can keep
pushing the ball forward yeah it's very
interesting how these various vectors
are coming together and to what I
broadly call what comes next
yeah not really sure because the nature
of emergence if it's really an emergence
you can't predict it but I think there's
a growing number of us that realize that
the current game game a is corrupt from
top to bottom it's also on a
self-destructive path that's gonna kill
us through ecocide if not through some
other means and it might find some other
means that do us in quicker and I also
like you used the word alignment bruce
Kunkle one of the old gangsters from the
original game B often likes to say
alignment beyond agreement which I find
to be hugely powerful that those of us
that are on this mission of building a
self-organizing networks
centric decentralized metastable world
don't have to agree on everything people
right and in fact that is provided a
huge clue to me on how to build which is
from the bottom up from the locality
first right rather than you know Big
Ideas top-down make people do it at
gunpoint the old Nazi communist approach
and we don't have to agree as long as
we're aligned generally on a better way
to be we can disagree about a number of
things as long as we have a coherence
what I call coherent pluralism there's a
core of things we agree to agree on and
then everything else we agree that we
can disagree honorably with right yes
nothing wrong with that in the slightest
and I see that is the way forward let's
get back a little bit to your journey
sure
now this is one I happen to agree with
you on you mentioned that you know
traditional and you mentioned the words
already traditional masculinity is now
considered toxic and all that business
funny I was returned to an old online
community of mine yesterday which I've
been away from from a year it's kind of
gotten taken over in parts of at least
by what I would call goofy woke left
this and I got greeted by wow no toxic
masculine guy is back fuck you I like to
take their own rhetoric and do a little
rhetorical judo which is in my opinion
toxic masculinity is hate speech right
and of course sends him in a tizzy right
because oh damn and I use a judo move on
them because it really is right I mean
toxic means poisonous right let's look
it up in the dictionary
toxic means poisonous so how can be a
normal man with normal masculine values
in history be labeled toxic and not be
hate speech indeed it is it's important
to what you did which is which is to
turn of rules around on them which is to
use their rhetoric and to use their
standards and to turn it around and
that's a it usually doesn't lead to
anything super productive but it does it
does sort of take the air out of some of
the attacks that they have and there are
people online who dedicate their lives
to following that rule of making them
making the other side live up to their
their own standards but the subject that
you bring up toxic masculinity I mean is
that where is that where
we're headed with this because we can we
can dig into that yeah yeah yeah let's
talk about a little bit yeah it's like I
said before you know it it felt it felt
weird and sort of weak almost to to say
out loud that there was an attack on
masculinity or that there was rhetoric
around masculinity that was meant to
diminish it that seems like a weak
position almost right it's like I'm not
a victim here I'm not going to say that
these people are harming me I'm not
gonna I'm not gonna cry and say oh these
poor people are making fun of
masculinity but the more I learned about
it the more I realized that it's
actually fundamental element of the
strategy of the takeover by postmodern
fuse with intersectionality fused with
critical theory that that is a
fundamental strategy because at the core
of all those philosophies the what has
I'm saying James Lindsay's latest book
cynical theories you should get it
really lays out in a scholarly way the
the the literature and how it led to
where we are today white male power is
implicit and understood as a direct
quote from a 1989 essay by kimberlé
crenshaw which helped kickstart the
intersectionality movement and their
whole concept is that every society has
been patriarchal and oppressive and that
comes from from masculinity and male
power and male power masculine mostly
white white Straits is hetero male power
is is basically the root of all evil for
their philosophy which is now a religion
right because they're the way that
social justice and critical folks have
set up their philosophy it can it's it's
unchallengeable because there are no
there are no tools by which you can
analyze their philosophy there's no
tools by which you can critique their
positions because they have snatched out
the foundation for all of them by saying
you know science and reason are white
supremacy white supremacy logic and math
or white supremacy it reliance on data
is white supremacy and the only thing
that matters is people's lived
experience or what they call their
standpoint
and that that's their truth and then all
speech is political power and power is
about a Preston and white males are the
only ones who can be oppressive you know
once you figure all that out and then
you see it in practice and you see it in
practice in the implicit association
test that has been enforced upon large
parts of corporate America when you see
it in the American Psychological
associations you know statement on on
masculinity and how they need to
actually treat masculinity as a
pathology when you see the way that
masculine and men in general get treated
in family courts when you see all of
this added up when you hear believe all
women and forget about rule of law or
assume innocence until proven guilty or
due procedure or any of that when you
see people willing to throw away our
constitutional rights in the midst of
this battle against male power and
masculinity at some point you just have
to admit that it's happening and that
it's real and as dirty and is disgusting
and as shameful and is almost
embarrassing as it is to admit it it's
it's true and it's real and it's a war
based in religious zealotry
and it's ongoing and it's continuing to
happen and it's literally tearing the
fabric of our society apart because we
are abandoning our values of science and
reason and we're embracing a religion
that cannot be challenged and if you are
not a participant in that religion and
if worse you have ejected yourself from
that religion and become an apostate
then you are somebody who in their mind
is lacking a clear moral compass and is
almost less than human so we're seeing
we're seeing all this actually filter
from the lowest parts of our independent
relationships all the way up to the
presidency of the United States to
Supreme Court hearings with Brett
Kavanaugh to the Past that Joe Biden is
gonna get on his accusations about rape
and sexual assault to to the way things
are being handled
college campuses and the and the
philosophies and instruction are being
put into our children's heads it's a
total war it's everywhere and their goal
is literally to destroy Western society
and their explicit about it and we have
to just start taking them at face value
and I didn't want to because you sound
like a crazy person when you talk like
that but the events of the last few
years have finally finally beat me over
the head enough to where I can say that
that's true and I don't feel stupid
saying it and I can point to a whole
list of a whole list of evidence that
backs backs up that assertion including
the explicit stated goals of the folks
that are now taking over our institution
so that was a long answer but it's
important stuff and and I'm glad that I
came to these conversations with my
background in male-female relationships
and understanding what it's like on the
ground because it gives me a very clear
sense of what's happening from the
trenches and now I get to engage with
guys like you and James and others on
this on theory and on public policy and
on practice so I'm ready I've been
fighting and preparing for this moment
for a decade or more
and so today is I'm built for today in
all these elements and uh it's actually
kind of exciting even though it's
depressing but I'm pressing forward
every day and of course I think you and
I would both agree as men of good faith
and honesty that the way women were
treated in America and across the West
for a long time was suboptimal right
definitely it wasn't that long ago women
couldn't own property couldn't vote
where the kids automatically went to the
father and a divorce or separation and
there there were a lot of both legal and
cultural problems that did need to be
addressed in you know the kind of Carter
started rolling after World War two and
it seemed to me for quite a while it was
on the right path and you know gathered
momentum around 1975 in fact I hopefully
one of my quotes that will survive is
that I say when historians look back at
the 20th century it may well be that it
wasn't the world wars nuclear energy
landing on the moon or the internet that
was the biggest event but rather after
10,000 years
patriarchy let's use the word women were
finally starting to become free in a
real sense around 1975 in fact later in
the book you talk about and identify
yourself as an equity feminist and I
used slightly different language I call
myself an equality feminist which is
that women should be legally free to do
what they want but we should not expect
that they'll want the same things as men
yes and it seems to me that that that
form of feminism I sign I call myself a
feminist right and I think I was well
ahead of the curve frankly particularly
in corporate America hired women in all
kinds of non-traditional jobs because I
said I don't really give a shit if
you're a man or a woman if you're happen
to be interested in being an assembly
language programmer and you're female
and I actually did hire such 1986 you
got the job right but now the idea of
what feminism has become has become many
people have been overloaded with post
modernist theory that as you laid out
rather eloquently takes us down the
rabbit hole into a world of complete
nonsense right you know the idea that
some witch doctors view on how to cure
polio is on par with Jonas Salk's is
just ridiculous right or that astrology
should have the same standing as
astronomy what could be wrong with such
people but those people unfortunately
have hijacked feminism and turned it
into this bizarre thing that's not
recognizable as equity or equality
feminism at all you know I actually was
talking with a very good friend of mine
very smart not long ago and we were
talking about feminism and and she has
unfortunately drank the bathwater and
she says you I won't believe that
feminism is triumphed until the number
of programmers in Silicon Valley are
exactly 50/50 mmm I go well Miss P
you're gonna probably have to wait a
long time because frankly I don't
believe that's congruent with human
nature or the differences on average
keep on mine on average these are
statistical curves with big overlaps
ain't never gonna happen you know and I
gave her the case of Sweden which she
didn't know you probably are aware of
this that Sweden probably the most
gender egalitarian fact I would say
certainly the most gender egalitarian
society in human history so far at least
since the invention of agriculture the
CEO of male-female in engineering is
more skewed towards the male than in the
United States the male-female ratio in
nursing in Sweden is more skewed towards
female than it is in the United States
and so here's a country that Inc by any
standards has gone as far as any other
country has gone or is likely to go in
an ethos and an age structure for gender
egalitarianism and yet there are
differences in the interests of people
on average not to say that there aren't
female engineers there's plenty of them
in Sweden but it's maybe 15 or 20
percent or are there male nurses maybe
it's ten percent it shouldn't be zero
but we should not expect equal outcomes
it's just unrealistic yeah I think
that's the main issue is is getting well
there's some number of things there but
yes one for sure as I wrote in my book
the the fight for equal legal conditions
under the law and the opportunity to do
whatever you want is a righteous
injustice war that was fought and won
and I support that 110 percent now what
I also support are women making
decisions that other women other
feminists don't agree with and it
doesn't seem to be the feminists that
today that are allowing and they don't
believe in female agency and in fact
writing about female agency was one of
the things that got me in hot water a
few years ago because you know I see out
there this exact example you're talking
about if like we need to have 50/50
gender equality in every profession but
that doesn't jive with biology it
doesn't jive with reality it doesn't
drive with what women was so effectively
what you've got now our radical third
and fourth wave feminists who don't
believe in female agency and don't
believe that there are any differences
between men and women and then also
believe that we should regulate
legislate and in bureaucratize
compelling women into professional
situations that they don't want to be in
you know basically the solution to their
problem their 50-50 problem are
authoritarian they are basically torture
they're basically slavery is basically
compelling people to do things that they
don't want to do
and when women don't conform to whatever
notion the radical feminists have in
their mind of how women should behave
and live then they get all crazy and
insane - and in fact the whole thing mmm
I again am making the same problem that
others make which is trying to apply
rational thought to irrational behavior
there's just no there's no way to do it
and and the more you try to analyze it
and the more you try to apply rational
lens the more frustrating it becomes
because it is just a mucky gobbly gook
of nonsense that really lacks at a
fundamental level and appreciation for
Liberty and appreciation for personal
agency an appreciation for the
individual right all these things which
are fundamental to our society
fundamental to our Western Way of life
and people who consider themselves today
still feminists who still fight these
wars I don't know if most of them
understand that they're actually working
towards an erosion of the Enlightenment
values and the Western values that
founded our nation that gave them the
position to be in that they're in today
and so there's like a huge information
campaign that needs to go on an
education campaign a national education
campaign which is going to be very
difficult to do because the the folks
that are you know purport of pushing
these ideas that like I said it's a
religion now they're there's no
questioning these concepts there's no
questioning these ideas and as soon as
you speak up you're just a racist
misogynistic asshole and you can be
discarded and thrown to the wayside
and now all these folks are embedded in
our institutions in the media in the
government in our corporate HR
departments academia everywhere and
they're there now in every other field
on top of it law critical law Theory
critical fat shaming fat studies
disabled studies etc where they're
literally getting in the way of people
becoming healthy and they're literally
getting in a way of people's Liberty and
the opposites of these are you know this
health unhealth lack real slavery you
know authoritarianism you know lack of
liberty lack of freedom and these things
are antithetical to the United States
and we're having an internal civil war
on these ideas and the Claremont
Institute folks they've identified that
this is actually a separate system of
justice that has been established within
the United States that doesn't allow for
everyone to seek their own outcomes and
their own benefit but rather you have to
take from one person to give to another
which is again not part of our
traditional justice ideas and so there's
a real struggle for the future of the
United States and all Western societies
right now it sounds dramatic but it's
absolutely true and if you track other
political movements you can see that
they have in the beginning dinner'll II
start with like an art aesthetic and the
post modernism you know started as an
artist etic and then it evolved into an
application of that our aesthetic
politically speaking and now it has
moved into what James Lindsay called the
reification stage where it's like God
like it's religion like and now it's in
our institutions so this is a long path
that has taken decades to get to where
we are now and unfortunately it's gonna
take decades to unwind this or to build
something that can be a competitor
that's going to force these ideas out of
our art and music consumption
corporations health insurance healthcare
education care I mean and it's an every
subject that we deal with and it's going
to take something revolutionary either
to get it
eradicated quickly or it's going to take
decades like it did for them to grow for
us to grow something that's going to be
a counterbalance and I don't know Jim if
we've got time do we have decades before
before our game a system just spirals
out of out of control and disintegrates
right in front of our face I don't think
so it's an interesting question and in
our game be world there's a big
discussion on the game B group on
Facebook for those that are interested
also you can check the hashtag game be
all one word on Twitter and follow these
discussions there's
you know those who think that we do have
time and that we can out-compete and out
evolve over the next 50 or 60 years and
there are others who believe that game a
has so many internal self contradictions
and is leading to ever increasing
polarization that will have a rupture at
some point reasonably soon I must say as
a person who studied complexity science
I try to maintain epistemological
modesty about the unfoldings of complex
systems we can know a bit about it but
to actually call your shot I think is a
little over-ambitious
rather much like a good prepper does and
I'll admit to being a semi prepper which
probably cost me a certain amount of
Social Credit the last 30 years but I've
earned it all back an interest over the
last two months I can tell you god damn
yeah that I think of an ensemble of
trajectories as a good prepper does
right as I tell my prepper friends you
know don't prep for the asteroid that
killed the dinosaurs if that happened
just put your head between your legs and
kiss your ass good-bye
right but pick a series of scenarios
which are plausible and prep for those
right and so I think the same way about
the collapse of game a it could happen
tomorrow afternoon might not happen till
2100 where we gradually eat it up from
the bottom so I'm kind of open on that
question another comment about
postmodern and cancer that you've you
know described as kind of eaten the
brain of many of our elites and I
recently had a discussion a very good
discussion with Hansie Frei nack
one of the leading lights of Mehta
modernism in fact I had a second one
very recently as well and one of the
things I push back on him he now
actually is kind of agreeing with me I
said Hansie you estimated that 25% of
people in modern societies like Sweden
or the United States are post modernists
I'd say horseshit I think it's more like
1% and he said how do you get to that
number and I said here's how I got to
that number basically take those who
went to a top 10% elite university which
will get you down to you know your
Georgetown's your University of
Michigan's etc the University of
Virginia that's 10 percent of college
grads let's take the 30% of them that
are humanities or social science majors
that get you to 3% and college grads are
about a third of our population they get
you to 1% so only 1% of people have
actually been
infected with the disease the problem is
though as you pointed out in passing is
that these people are absolutely grossly
over concentrated in the higher levels
of media the law academia itself so I
would argue that the deep disease
postmodernist theory is way thinner than
we think but these people have
unfortunately seized levers of power on
our institutions so the fight might be
not as bad as we think as long as we
realize that it's this 1% that is our
opponents you know not the institutional
ramifications that these 1% of caused
that make sense yeah it definitely does
and you're right you know it makes me
think of Nassim Taleb theory the tyranny
of the minority so it doesn't really
matter if you have a majority you just
need to have high leverage power which
they definitely have but as in context
with our our current social media
environment the Pomo guys the critical
guys they don't have to it's not who
studied in college and who has power
over the lovers now it's their ability
to inject these memes and ideas into our
society which then get it swallowed
uncritically and so i would argue that
most of America at least blue America
for sure has swallowed all of these
concepts and ideas without even
questioning it and don't even realize
that they have been Trojan horsed as in
a way right so like for example my aunt
ardent feminist from the 60s right who
fought for all the things that we agree
on our good things still calls herself a
feminist today and snout outs and spouts
the poem Oh critical party line
uncritically because in her mind she
can't see that her movement has been
hijacked and then it happened
all these kids today with the movies and
social media and the memes and and you
know the the television shows that just
uncritically spread these notions that's
the real struggle is the mimetic
struggle and i don't know how long it's
gonna take to wash that out
also when you're 1% or 3% you talk about
are established in bureaucracies and in
corporations and tenured positions in
academia doesn't matter is only 3%
they're like you can't get rid of all
they're like embedded and they're there
and so it's it's I understand what
you're saying but I think that when you
look at it from that perspective it may
minimize the struggle and it may
minimize the impact that the ideas are
having on our society especially when
most of the frontline soldiers are just
spouting these those mimetic ideas
without any critical thinking or
understanding of where they come from or
why so when you try to have a
conversation with them they're instantly
triggered mostly I think because when
they begin to examine their own thought
process they can't come up with
something logical because there is no
logic and so it causes them great
frustration and there's no way to have a
conversation with somebody I find that
you know you mentioned the matrix
earlier I find that in order to shake
people from those thought patterns and
that thought model it takes a crisis it
takes something external to them it
takes like a big fucking Club over the
head but it gives them a moment to
reconsider because if you're just going
about your day to day life you have no
real reason to question these ideas and
then you know someone questions you you
get angry and you're like that guy's an
asshole what a Nazi and then you just
move on you don't really reconsider it's
only when life forces you to reconsider
things that people are gonna take a good
hard look and I just don't know how long
that's gonna take
it'd be interesting to see what comes
out of this Koba 19 thing some people
for the first time ever in their life
they've been living in the hammock of
American luxury have to actually make a
few serious decisions about their life
maybe that'll start some of them to be
more empowered we're moving along here
in time kind of fast so let me jump back
into your book a little bit and maybe
you can tell us a little bit about your
education work and how all that ended
and that will kind of take us into a
whole nother direction where your eyes
sort of changed how they saw
yeah so unfortunately I've had more than
one negative experience and education in
fact my whole doxxing experience with
the antifa and whatnot it's not even in
the book cuz that all happened after the
majority of the book was written so
there was a I documented experience in
in my book Democrats of deplorable where
I was the white male leader of basically
a hundred percent african-american
school staff was 95% african-american I
had been working very hard and
diligently to improve the standing of
the school we had tripled our score on
the scorecard that was issued by the
regulators we had improved all of our
scores we had built a design to plan to
turn the school around
I saved the school millions of dollars I
hid all of our projections all of our
trajectories all of our scores way above
schedule and eventually though I got out
stood because my board became populated
with social justice warriors who could
not stand the sight of having a white
male masculine figure in charge of an
education institution and serve
predominantly african-americans and
hired predominantly african-american
women on staff they just couldn't stand
for it no matter the fact that we had
achieved every goal that we had set
forth literally literally refinance the
entire organization save millions of
dollars built a huge fund raise scores
tripled our report card score
you know I saved that school and they
came and they took it away in the way
that they took it away from me I was
executive director they were this was
the board's action the way they took it
away from me is they they said that
there was a complaint against me that
said that I had created a hostile work
environment for for women and for
african-americans now this is such an
insane thing to say because I had 85%
staff retention I had hired and promoted
nothing but african-american and women I
had developed all these professionals I
haven't powered them I gave them a
chance to succeed I let them do the
initiatives they wanted to take
everybody was returning I mean I made
the retention rates as stipulated by my
my performance agreement and yet they
they said that there was a complaint
against me for creating a hostile work
environment for women and
african-americans and so I was being
suspended while that was being
investigated said okay all right that
sounds crazy to me please send me the
report send me the complaint guess what
no complaints they were never able to
turn over any complaint there was no
complaint they completely fabricated it
I hired an attorney the attorney kept
hammering them for the complaint there
was no complaint
there was no accusation of racism from
my staff no accusation of sexism from my
staff in fact they all voted with their
feet and returned at something like 85%
and yet the board wanted me gone there
was no way they could get rid of me they
literally paid me my bonus because I hid
all the numbers there was literally
nothing they could do so they concocted
a story about me being a racist and a
sexist and they voted me off and the
board would split five to four and the
four people it was split down female and
male lines and then the the Centers
resigned afterwards because it was such
a ridiculous thing that had happened and
sad I'm sad to report now that those
same people that outed me from that
school in 2015-2016 they ran the school
to the fucking ground and the thing got
closed so they kicked me out when we
were doing great things and then they
ruined the thing and the school is now
closed and completely shut down and all
I have to show for it is a chapter in my
book or I get to help mind the fact that
social justice warriors can even get out
of their own way to allow African
American students to obtain better
education outcomes they have to inject
everything with their philosophy and
with their perception of the world they
can't rely on data they can't look at
numbers that are telling them the truth
right straight in their face and what is
their go-to weapon you're a racist
you're a sexist and you got to be you
got to be kicked out of here and you
know had I done that that's fine but I
am the complete opposite of that and if
evidence that there was absolutely no
report ever filed nothing they could
ever turn over to me I Foyet it and
everything it wasn't there
there's just no there's just no excuse
and it was just a prime example of
social justice warriors getting in the
way of actually positive outcomes for
the people that they're purporting to
help and it's a sad story that ended
with the school closing just like a year
ago
and they took it over and drew and ran
it into the ground and they ruined it
and it's just something those are the
kind of things that we have to look out
for all across the country and now it's
not even just in education it's in
health care it's in disability studies
it's health being healthy now saying
healthy is good is bad right that's
oppressive now like so people social
justice are literally getting in the way
of people educating themselves getting
in the way of people liberating
themselves getting the way of people's
personal agency getting in the way of
people becoming healthy or let our less
disabled or obese I mean it's just
insane and that was a moment in which I
realized that no matter what I did I
would be called a racist and a
misogynist no matter what even though I
basically hired all minorities and women
for almost 10 years
train them promoted them gave them
bonuses rewarded their good bit you know
good performance gave them free leeway
to do what they wanted and to implement
their own ideas and it translated into
higher test scores for basically a
hundred percent poverty-stricken kids in
the District of Columbia none of that
mattered the only thing that mattered
was that I was a white dude and they had
to get rid of me and if they ruined the
whole thing because of it so be it
yeah this social justice warrior
obsession on race and left foot on the
table there is still systemic racism in
our country there is still residual
implicit racism and everybody including
black people interestingly the
psychology lab tests on implicit racism
show that majority of blacks actually
have negative attitudes about blacks or
in addition to some negative attitudes
about whites and whites do too and so
these things are real I mean you'd
expect after 500 600 years of racial
discrimination much of it legal
institutionalized horrors like slavery
there'd still be some left but there's
not as much left it seems to me as the
insanity of the kind you just described
represents let me quote a statistic from
the Gallup poll this is a question I
find to be the question about real
racism people who really hate other
people for their race which is do you
approve or disapprove of marriage
between blacks and whites you know if
you were a real racist think that the
other race is inferior then you're gonna
be opposed to people close to you being
married to them in 1959 how many
disapproved of marriage between blacks
and whites 96% disapproved 1959 and 2015
8 percent disapproved
we went from 96% who I would say could
be called on the surface literally
racist thought marriage between black
and white was wrong it's now down to 8%
over a relatively short period time
seems like a remarkable progress and yet
social justice warriors seem more spun
up than they've ever been not to say
that we should give up the fight we
still have to get rid of that last 8%
but it seems to me that the intensity of
the foaming has gotten way stronger as
the amount of racism has actually
declined yes that's absolutely correct
and part of the reason for that is
because as a society becomes flatter
instances of in equal outcomes become
more prominent and so there when the
this is the real rub
there has never been a time in America
where minorities and women have had had
more rights more opportunities more
people rooting for them to win there's
never been in a time in America where
there was more money spent on education
more of a focus of closing the education
achievement gap there's never been a
time at which the corporate America
wanted to hire more minorities more
people of color more women etc etc never
never has there been a time at which the
whole society was working towards that
and yet we find there are persistent
differences in outcomes there's
differences in education outcomes or
differences and professional outcomes
and so now because most of the limiting
factors have been peeled away now people
are left to become who they are
basically because of who they are and of
their personal choices and the choices
of their families and such and if
there's not a hundred percent equal
outcome in that environment then it has
to be only because there are racists out
there and so as long as there is a
persistence in a difference of outcomes
the left majority left now will only be
able to point to a mythical fabricated
sense of racism that's out there because
don't push back a little bit on this the
remaining you know element of core
institutional racism in America that's
all assuming that there are actually
people sitting in a position at a desk
somewhere that's deciding to act in a
racist capacity when we talk about there
being a gender gap in wages that's not
just like some if it if it to the extent
that it exists which it doesn't that's
not just like some big figure you know
ethereal ephemeral figure out there that
you're pointing a finger at no you're
actually pointing the finger at a guy at
a desk or a woman at a desk
who's looking at a resume and looking
across the table at somebody and being
like well we usually pay men a hundred
grand for this job because she's a woman
we're gonna pay her 70 grand that's what
that means is it when when people talk
about institutional racism or
discrimination I it to me it's a cop-out
because it's avoiding actually zeroing
down on the specific instances on the
margin at which discrimination allegedly
is taking place and so when you really
begin to think about how is it actually
happening there there have to be people
who are making these decisions and
frankly I just don't see that happening
out there at all and unfortunately there
are going to be differences in outcomes
across all groups of people we know this
to be a fact we know we can study
science shows us that men and women at
large have differences in preferences
and psychological makeups that are going
to lead to different outcomes like men
being men and women being women free to
be who they want to be are going to have
different income levels that's just
something we all need to accept but
nobody can seem to accept that fact and
and that is going to apply to tall
people being better at basketball and
smart people being better at physics and
whatever the case may be there's gonna
be differences and outcomes and as you
pointed out rightfully in the Swedish
model when people are given is the the
maximum amount of freedom to be who they
are and who they want to be they end up
picking things that are different from
other people and they end up having
different outcomes so as a society we
have to accept and we haven't gotten
there yet especially in terms of
Education we have to accept that there's
going to be different outcomes and until
we can accept that there's going to be
different outcomes there's going to be
this ongoing war on racism and war on
oppression and more on masculinity or on
white people because today now it
becomes the only explanation rather than
accepting the fact that there's going to
be different outcomes now as my
experience in education has shown me
there are two factors which almost 100%
correlate with student outcomes it is
the education level of the mother and
the income level of the zip code that
the student comes from those things
which then actually have a relationship
to race because of our history and
because of the way the cities work and a
welfare state works and the soul system
works which can also argue you know that
there is that that is one element of
quote the institutional racism but it's
not racism per se at this point because
it's it's help right it's like the
welfare system is meant to be
for great but it's actually causing
problems and so when the outcomes are
unequal which they are the achievement
gap is persistent and consistent by
those factors all across the country we
have to accept that throwing more money
at that's not going to solve the problem
calling more people racism is not going
to solve the problem in fact I think
accepting that they're going to be
different outcomes is a humane and
empathetic way to go about your life and
this is where it gets difficult to have
these conversations I had a conversation
like this with the with an evolutionary
psychologist but Weingard you know and
here in trouble for talking about this
kind of stuff because you can accept
that there are differences there are
innate differences biological
differences psychological differences
differences and outcomes without all of
a sudden like taking some great leap
into supremacy and oppression and like
eugenics and shit it's like we just need
to look around and accept a reality so
that we can we can do the things which
are going to improve it and right now I
just don't see that happening at all and
it's it's a little bit frustrating and
so to get to tie this all back together
when when if society is flat like ours
is instances of differing outcomes are
going to be assigned
but the racism tag until we can accept
that there are actually going to be
differences in outcomes based on
preferences and based on abilities and
in so that's how I miss it you know I
don't know what's gonna happen and I
don't know how to get people to accept
that to be honest yeah push back just a
little which is especially with respect
to race I think so-called systemic
racism which I like it's a better term
than institutional racism one can argue
that the effects of past racism must
still be substantially impacting the
african-american community you know I
bought a house in the in 2002 in Santa
Fe New Mexico and right in the title it
said as a covenant you may not sell this
house to a black person right that
became unenforceable maybe in 1968 or
there abouts but I mean there was
absolutely rigid racism in housing there
was redlining and banking it was illegal
for a black person to marry a white
person here in Virginia until 1967 and
that has had to have long-term systemic
impact on the culture on the Family
Fortunes
on all kinds of things that is still
negatively impacting african-americans
definitely the other one is the implicit
racism is real I mean there's lab
psychology tests show it clearly and
there's even much more pragmatic
real-world testing I'm you probably read
about you send a resume and it's
identical except the name is you know
Jamal Robinson on one and you know chip
Smith on the other and chip Smith is
gonna get 20 or 30% more replies from
employers than Jamal Robinson well so
that's still there and I think it's way
premature to say the fight against
racism is over but we've made a lot of
progress and then the other one that you
did not mention which unfortunately gets
to be a third rail and discussions about
this is partially impact of past racism
and random evolutionary drift has
produced some sub cultural issues that I
believe are a fair amount of what is
keeping the achievement gap between
blacks and whites there you know for
instance seventy percent of black
children are now born out of wedlock I
mean yes sorry that's not a formula for
average statistical success amongst
black males in many places not
everywhere but in many places there's a
meme that doing well in school is acting
white and therefore you know hateful and
you remember what being a junior high
school kid was like you know being out
of touch with your you know your local
culture is a tough thing when you're 13
or 14 years old and so if the attitude
is you know doing well in algebra is
acting white an awful lot of black kids
who have the ability aren't going to do
it and then finally there's a very odd
one which academics refuse to study
because of political correctness which
is that black children at the time they
enter preschool have a very
substantially smaller vocabulary than
white kids mm-hmm probably caused by
different styles of parenting in the two
communities and it doesn't matter what
the income level is you know a
neurologists and lawyers black child
will have a lower vocabulary than a
white neurologists and lawyers one and
probably a culture how the children
array
but no one will study it because they're
afraid of being called racist so anyway
there's still some reality they're under
still some work to be done and I just
want to interrupt one thing sorry that
the implicit association test is is
bullshit I have to say that and in fact
the actual author of the implicit
association test has come out and said
publicly that that test is not
meaningful to use as a behavior
modification system or as a way to
actually accurately assess whether or
not people are inherently racist and the
IAT if you want to do the research it's
out there and I'd and I suggest talk
looking up Jesse's single he's a leftist
journalist who has dug down super deep
on this and revealed the implicit
associations has to be a bunch of shit
I've taken the implicit association test
myself and I was able to game the system
I was able to just do it how I make the
outcome whatever I wanted it to be so
the idea that there's some sort of
implicit racism within us that is
uncontrollable that we cannot resist and
we cannot fight back against it
influences all of our behavior every day
I think is actually a very nefarious and
negative idea that the actual author of
the study would say is not true and does
not come from the study itself I mean
the study is like you did the test is
you you have to they time your ability
to associate positive words with white
or black faces and what they're saying
is that it's easier and as evidence in a
shorter duration that it takes you to
assign a good word to a white face than
it does to a black face and vice versa
negative words it takes longer to
associate them to Hawaii face than it
does to a black face you know if that
test he says is in applicable to analyze
society at large and then it should not
be the basis for behavior modification
programs which it is now basically in
every corporation in America every
institution of a university the implicit
association test is assumed to be gospel
and there is a billion billion billion
dollar industry
built around it where people come to
your school your institution and they
teach you how racist you are and that
you can't help it except we're gonna
brainwash you and brainwash you and
brainwash you through all these
different programs and workshops and
whatever and beat you over the head with
the fact that you're a racist even
though the study itself is flawed so I
strongly suggest that you take a deeper
look on that and look at Jessie single
because that guy's totally unbiased he's
not a Republican he's totally
egalitarian and he just was able to suss
out the fact that that test does not
have any scientific merit in the same
way that whatever study that they did to
say that there's like one in four women
on campus gets raped or sexually
assaulted that to completely bunk even
the people that created the tests say
that it's not universally representative
can't be extrapolated it was a survey
they twisted the words around however
that test just like the implicit
association test that survey became the
foundation for the 2011 Dear Colleague
letter that modified title mine which
then corrupted our entire academic
system and put all men in the crosshairs
called everybody a rapist and so there
are these zombies studies that float
around
they even though the creator's
themselves say they shouldn't be used
for how they're being used they're
continuing to be built to bulge in
people over the head and build entire
huge billion-dollar industries around
them and these are the things that we
need to destroy so I don't mean to harp
on that but the IAT is one in particular
that requires deeper investigation
well send me the link and I'll put it up
on the page so people can make the
decision for themselves let's turn to
the next part of your journey which is
it sound like you know you grew up as a
Democrat right probably a pretty
progressive one but then after all these
experiences and the research you did in
the road you took you did the
unthinkable talked about your previous
political views and then where you ended
up in 2016 and both intellectually and
emotionally about that journey I think
if people find that very interesting
well I'll say this my dream I have not
changed so that's that's the issue I
haven't changed the world around me has
changed dramatically now I always
believed that you know support gay
people's rights to get married and how
guns and grow weed right gays guns and
drugs was what I always said even as a
kid as of a shorthanded way to describe
my views on Liberty right let people do
what they want to do so long as it
doesn't impact other people and those
but I still have that same position what
happened was is that the the Democrats
as we've discussed have created a new
system of justice that's not based on
Liberty it sinto Taliah unjust it's
about taking from other people it's
about blaming other people it's about an
aggressive act to diminish other people
in order to quote provide justice and so
once a bird fell happened gay marriage
was solidified and and and ruled to be
the law of the land
and once it appeared to be to me that
the cannabis legalization movement had
reached a tipping point once those two
issues came off the table because I
support them both my allegiance to the
Democratic Party was severed at the same
time as the Democrats seem to be
spiraling farther and farther away from
me to the left into this very very ultra
progressive social justice shit which
isn't based on any sense of Liberty at
all so I have stood still while the
world around me has just gone crazy the
Democrats of careens to the left the
Republicans are supporting cannabis and
gay marriage Donal
was the first presidential candidate
ever in the history of America whose
poet whose platform position was that
gay marriage was settled and the law of
land not even Barack Obama not even
Hillary Clinton not anybody else it was
Donald Trump was the very first
presidential candidate to support gay
marriage so when now I can say okay drug
legalization looks like it's on its way
or at least cannabis gay marriage has
been ratified and is the law of the land
now I don't need the Democrats I don't
need to support them because that was
achieved and in fact in fact now they
they have stopped being the the
advocates for Liberty and advocates for
this injustice and this bullshit way of
distributing prestige and merit and
resources among people who claim to be
victims and have created a whole new
victim culture and who have this you
know it had abandoned any notions of due
process and justice for for boys and men
on college campus which thank God was
just remedy just yesterday by Betsy
DeVos in the Education Department of
Education so I would argue that I
personally haven't been on a journey the
country has been on some crazy journey
the country has gotten drunk and fallen
down and they're in an alley and I'm
still standing there like what the fuck
are they doing and so now that you know
Donald Trump's onstage with a rainbow
flag and he's been very clear on his
position on cannabis legalization you
know that opened the door for me to
consider other things and so it was kind
of easy for me because the Democrats
they they they left me I left them and
we were done we were done and so now
whatever candidate is going to
acknowledge that we have or facing an
existential threat from critical and
social justice theories and personally
for me who understand a candidate that
understands that China is a major
competitor and that we're actually in a
war with them already that candidates
going to get my vote you know I'm not
beholding to Trump in fact I wrote very
clearly in the book that supporting him
is awesome often times very distasteful
and and it smells bad and you got to
pull your nose and just swallow hard but
he understood or at least signaled that
he understood the core issues that
mattered to me and this title nine
modification that just was ratified just
the other day May 5th and 6th was a
complete vindication for me a complete
and total justification for supporting
Donald Trump I wrote in my book I wrote
as early as 2016 before Trump was even
the candidate before he was even the
nominee I said that Donald Trump as
president will remedy the title 9 crisis
and if he doesn't it will all be worth
it to me and guess what Jim just two
days ago in the last 24 hours he
actually did that a restored due process
and justice to our universities and
restored free speech and protection of
rights to our universities and to our
college students and so I'm feeling very
good about my choice also he understands
that were in conflict with China so now
again that those social issues have been
resolved and the Democrats went all
haywire and nutso it makes me open up my
mind to other candidates and I have to
fight not only for the positions that I
believe in which I've already stated but
I also have to fight against the
positions which I believe are harmful so
I can't blow a third party and let a
Democrat win because a Democrat is gonna
carry with them the social justice
coalition that does not believe in
actual justice does not believe in
science does not believe in reason does
not believe in the enlightenment does
not believe in Western civilization and
in fact have as their mission to destroy
it why in the world would I vote someone
into office who has part of their
coalition a desire to destroy our
country that makes absolutely no sense
to me whatsoever and so not only do I
have to vote for Trump to vote for the
things that I believe in but I have to
vote for a viable candidate that will
defeat the Democrats because the
Democrats currently have even their
political coalition people that want to
destroy Western civilization that seems
like an absolutely fucking no-brainer to
me and it's sort of my mission to get
that out there in the world because if
people really truly understood what it
meant to vote for Democrats especially
to put them in power the Senate and the
house and control of our courts and
control of even seemingly mundane things
like the national labor
you bored in other jurisdictions and
other bureaucratic bodies that have the
ability to enforce laws and bureaucratic
edicts across the land if people really
understood what they were voting for if
they voted for the Democrats I don't
think any of them would because they
don't understand it goes back to what we
were talking about before about only 3%
of the world are our critical theorists
or whatever but doesn't matter when half
the country has swallowed their memes
and believes them and espouses them then
we have to educate we have to change
their minds we have to show them what's
actually happening and that's basically
been part of one of my missions in the
last few years is just try to pull back
the covers I use a metaphor in a book
often about the sanitizing effect of
daylight you know we just need to expose
these things because if you talk about
them enough the logical conclusion to
talking about them is that they will go
away because there's no logic there and
so that's my mission and again just to
wrap it all up but like the Democrats
left me I left the Democrats at the same
time because the Democrats aren't who
they used to be there is no you know
it's not the Democrats at the 90s I
voted for Clinton Bill Clinton I voted
for Barack Obama
I was a lifelong Democrat but once a few
of those social issues were resolved and
combine that with them careening wildly
to the left it became an absolute
no-brainer and and I believe no diss on
anybody but if you dig deep into their
platform and the philosophies which
underpin their policies there's no
logical way if you believe in America if
you believe in Liberty there's no way
you can vote for a Democrat period full
stop
so you adhere to the I think the guy I
don't remember the author but wrote an
article before the election calling this
United flight 93 election that's right
Michael Michael Anton yep so you're you
view that the Democrats have become so
corrupt and so potentially pernicious
that it's a matter of life and death to
prevent them from getting power yes and
not not co-opted in a corporatist sense
like you know taking money from
lobbyists because Republicans do that
obviously as well no it's a corrupt in
the sense that they're underpinning
political philosophy is not based in
justice nor in Liberty nor rooted in the
Enlightenment nor a fan of Western
civilization like Makhno sense to me if
you really can explore and understand
those things how you could vote someone
into office who has who is beholding to
people that want to destroy Western
civilization I don't get it makes no
sense to me do you think maybe you might
be overreacting to a fringe of nut bags
and the Democratic coalition I mean yeah
AOC she might believe some stuff like
that but Joe Biden seems unlikely no Joe
Biden Joe Biden is the one that believed
in the rape culture who did the 2011
Dear Colleague letter that took away do
justice and due process and Liberty from
boys across the country who prohibited
accusers of being cross-examined who
threw away evidence-based
decision-making no Joe Biden is the
worst one of them all Joe Biden has no
idea what he's doing and he has no
apparently either he's completely
ignorant or he's evil I'm gonna probably
go with a combination of them but Jim
back up for a second we've already
established that the postmodern critical
folks have taken over every institution
in America they're already in power and
they're already doing their thing we
have people and we have our education
system k12 is going to fully adopt
wholeheartedly the 16:19 project even
though the people that wrote the thing
had to come out and say that it was
flawed they just gave themselves a
Pulitzer Prize it's now gonna be part of
our curriculum to teach us that our kids
that our government was created and our
revolution was had in order to protect
encourage slavery come on get the fuck
out of here
that now they have taken over they have
power everywhere they're in all the key
positions of leverage and that political
coalition is part and parcel every
Democratic candidate on the stage in the
debate said some version of this America
country erases from top to bottom
racism getting worse every single day
misogyny getting worse every single day
all of them they can't even they can't
even say I'm gonna pick the best
candidate for vice president they all
have to come out and say I'm gonna pick
a woman because she's a woman because
she's got magic ideas because she has
boobs none of that makes any sense to me
and they've become completely plain
about it there's no hiding it anymore
and so no I don't think it's I don't
think I'm overreacting in fact I think
I'm I'm shining the light in the exact
key position where it needs to be
showing everyone the evidence discussing
all the philosophical underpinnings
showing the clear scholarly work that
has led us to this moment showing the
lack of due process on campus showing
infringement of Rights showing the
hypocrisy that the Kavanagh stuff versus
the Biden stuff I mean I don't know I
think I'm the only one in speaking
speaking the plain truth and that's
partially because this is hidden in its
insidious and it's pernicious and and
and there are carriers there okay this
is a good analogy
they're like asymptomatic carriers of
kovat they don't know that they're
spreading the virus they're just walking
around coughing on people but they don't
know it right and so when people will
say things like believe all women they
don't understand that that's a denial of
reality and justice and science and
reason and liberty they just think oh
it's cool we should defend all women
right but no it's deeper than that
because it's creating a parallel system
of Justice that that is is totally
antithetical to the founding fathers
visions and to the Constitution and to
the Enlightenment and to everything else
so maybe I sound like a crazy radical I
don't think so I have reluctantly come
to these positions through thorough
investigation and analysis okay I would
say you make your point of view very
clear commend you for that you've done
the work and you admit the fact that
Trump is a bit of a prime fucking
asshole right total renewed
I mean and you know I could not vote for
the man you know I must say on the
grounds of character he's a liar I'm I
don't think I'm I'm not even sure he's a
liar because I think he's sufficiently
mentally deranged that he does not
understand the difference between truth
and a lie I'm on Monday he'll say X on
Tuesday he'll say Y
on Wednesday he'll say X again and won't
even be slightly embarrassed about it
and you know he's a narcissist on a
level that I've never seen and I've had
a pretty high-profile business career I
met many of the famous tech gods of the
90s and double lots and other major
dudes on Wall Street and such
I never even came close to seeing a
narcissist on the level of Trump and you
know we're paying the price for his
narcissism here in this kovin 19 stuff
if he wasn't always trying to make
himself look good we might have actually
taken the thing seriously back in
February when there would have been time
for us to have squashed it like Taiwan
did but instead because Trump is he's
the deranged individual the guy's
mentally ill literally in the level of
narcissism and how everything has to
make him look good and is disconnected
from reality I don't know I mean I'm
with you on a fair amount of the
philosophical stuff I am an
Enlightenment man above all else and in
fact my version at least of game B is an
Enlightenment 2.0 and this is something
that Ponzi phrenic and I agree on that
the Enlightenment needs some upgrade and
improvement but it didn't indeed
enlighten the world so very important
but there are days I think that Trump is
suffering from tertiary syphilis I mean
how could somebody say the shit that the
man says he responded limit you know I I
hate being I hate being in the position
to care honor for Trump but you know one
thing to remember is you know he's
trained his whole life is dealing with
the media and the media has never been
straight about anything so he plays to
the media the media plays with him I
have no idea what he says behind closed
doors
I do remember his interviews with like
Oprah Winfrey in the 80s very clear
thinker always had America at her always
interested in protecting America from
foreign competitors always interested in
taking care of American worker and
prevent
taking the Chinese or Japanese takeovers
if you read his interviews and Playboy
and stuff from the 80s and 90s he's he's
been he's still talking about the same
things he'd been talking about back then
and his whole worldview was shaped
mostly by real estate in New York City
in the 80s where he saw how the Japanese
had been taking our lunch in an
industrial world than taking our dollars
coming back to United States and buying
up precious assets and he saw that and
he lived it he remembers when
Rockefeller Center was purchased by a
Japanese company that really left a big
impact on him and he's been singing the
same notes basically for 40 years now
does he lie and twist and exaggerate and
be all hyperbolic and shit hundred
percent can I listen to him talk all the
time no I certainly cannot but I think
that there are some broad general
strokes that make some sense to me and
again you know he is the one that's
pushing back against these things which
are fundamentally a conflict of interest
with Western civilization
does he do it in a way that's unsavory
and kind of gross sure but you know what
I'm I'm focused on existential threats
I'm not focused on being offended and by
the way what president what person who
aspires to be the leader of the free
world doesn't have some element of
narcissism built into them in fact I
think it's a precondition for the job
because who the who the hell would want
to be presidents a worst job in America
but you got to do it and there's got to
be reasons for it and on this issue
about kovat I would argue that the
network's chose when to shut down the
country not the President and not CDC
and the World Health Organization both
of those institutions were were
themselves behind the curve and in fact
the w-h-o and CDC both were giving
totally contrary opinions or sort of
giving advice at ran contrary to what we
ended up thinking was the right thing to
do as late as late February and early
March so I I push back on this too I
think that he's handled kovat as well as
any of our leaders could possibly have
done it and in fact he shut down the
economy and the Kilda stock market which
if you think about it well the two
things that he hold most important and
dear to him so he
that even knowing that it was going to
destroy his economy that he had built
that's gonna destroy the Dow Jones which
he you know it's taking claim for credit
for so he did that in knowing that it
was going to be a problem for him but I
would argue anyway no matter who the
president was the network of sense
makers of which we were a part in a limo
order for sure
decided on our own when it was time to
shut down I don't think for one second
that in late February
that the the country itself was ready to
accept closures he'll the country isn't
ready to accept closures today so I'm
not sure what more could have been done
all of the stuff about the ventilators
totally overblown they didn't even need
the ones they sent to New York City all
this stuff I don't know how much better
it could have been handled and I don't
know in our current system to what
extent he even has the comp you know the
control or the capability of doing
things quote earlier or doing things in
a more significant way the network's are
in control now and it's public the
public information networks that drew us
into the closure and they're gonna be
the ones that draw us out into whatever
the final resolution is gonna be all
right
well said I think I could disagree about
some of the details about Trump's
handling but let's move on the section
here which is about the new masculinity
or what is some positive models for
masculinity going forward and I as doing
my prep and I says you know I do a lot
of prep for every episode I read a
wonderful essay that you had written
some time back called smashing kids in
the face and other eight-plus dad tips
for 2020
I just reading this and I'm just going
yes this is wonderful to refresh your
memory it's about a dodgeball game you
had with some kids in a park tell us
about that yeah that's a great piece and
I appreciate you bringing that one up I
had a lot of fun with that so basically
what happened is my mom was in from out
of town and I've got three kids and so
our whole family a girlfriend everybody
we went to a dodge ball park and while
we were there we were playing and having
fun and and the kids wanted to play it
was a trampoline park rather and the
kids wanted to play trampoline dodgeball
so we went and we started playing just
our little family
and before I knew it there was like a
whole crew of like eight to ten to 12
year old boys I just showed up out of
nowhere to start playing in our
dodgeball game and the more aggressive
that we got and the more fun and the
harder we went like it seemed like the
boys or even more and more into it and
one time this kid hit me with the ball
and my first reaction I looked at him
was you know where's your dad and he
goes I don't have a dad that's like oh
and I looked around and I started to
observe and I noticed that oh there were
no fathers they're the ones who were
there were had their nose buried in
their phone there were moms there
without their husbands there were boys
there who didn't have dads and the dads
who were there weren't engaged they
weren't involved and one of them were
being physical or aggressive or smashing
kids in the face with little nerf balls
on a trampoline net where the kids
absolutely flipped and loved it right
the boys loved it so much I had to like
send them away after a while because I
want to get back to my own family and it
just became as I was writing about it it
just became a great example to me like
where is the male leadership in our
society today where are the dads out
there leading our families where is the
aggressiveness and competition and
physicality especially physicality
between dads and boys is important right
kids have to learn you know what
boundaries are they have to learn how
aggressive they can be without you know
making other people upset how to play
play is such an important part of
childhood development the whole story
just became an allegory or I don't know
a metaphor or whatever I'm not a writer
oh wait I am that the sort of emblematic
of society like you know the dads just
weren't there and it dads weren't doing
their thing and that's what we really
want to try to do as our response to all
of this social justice craz crazy
leftist stuff you know you mentioned the
word localism and you know I'm just just
beginning to explore that subject in
fact I'm going to be talking to Joe
Norman about that in a couple weeks and
my understanding or at least our
intention with the liminal or
is we want to fight this fight from the
ground up we want to put down roots and
build a community that focuses on and is
gathered around ideas of positive
masculinity and and the way that we are
formulating our response to culture war
is not by writing policy papers or
protesting or trolling people online or
whatever now our approach is to build
community and relationships start by
focusing on improving ourselves become
capable of being leaders then lead our
families and then if we can do that we
can help lead our communities and then
if we're capable of doing that then
maybe we can end up leading the nation
and so that's basically the general gist
of what the limo order is it's a it's a
community of men who believe in the
power of masculinity and understand that
in order to change the world we have to
change ourselves and we can do that and
then we can change our families and our
families lead our communities and
hopefully eventually either change the
nation lead the nation or be what's
standing when everything else comes
crashing down around us and the thesis
for the limo order has been proven in
that when people of like-minded interest
get together they can become happier
healthier and wealthier and safer that
has been proven and we combine the old
sense of communities with the nuisance
of network sense making then you have a
hybrid product which is us which is
Illumina order you know we're an old
old-style community in the sense it's
like Mutual Aid Society we help each
other when we're in crisis we do
professional networking personal
development social events we have
in-person meetings we've had in person
meetings that I think almost nine cities
across the country now and then we
combine that with network sense-making
and perception and discernment and so
we're both an old-line community plus a
21st century since making apparatus that
has allowed us to be ahead of the curve
on things like kovat and Corona
we knew that there was going to be a
total shutdown meat shortages all these
things that are happening now we knew
back in January we put out a position
paper in the middle of February it's of
our members warning them to get prepared
warning them to stock up on meats or get
you know hydrochloric win or do a number
of things but basically just be prepared
and you know some of our members
families said they report to us that
their families thought that they were
crazy but then a few weeks go by and all
sudden their prophetic you know in their
advanced knowledge of what was gonna
happen so that's our response all of
these things are tied together that's
why that essay is on my website that's
why my book is congruent with the work
that I'm doing the limo order that I've
created the community that we're
building all of these things are tied
together I'm tired of people whining
about shit on social media policy papers
are totally ineffective revenge is not
worthwhile for me with antifa and all
that the smart and only rational thing
to do is to build a community that's
based around the values that I hold
important to frame it and to gear it up
in a totally 21st century way and to
live the best lives that we possibly can
so that we can build a community that's
either going to be a role model for
society or in the event of cataclysmic
event which I know a lot of people that
you and I talked to think is coming in
the next few years here then maybe we
will be an entity that is left standing
amidst the bubble and ready to lead the
way then - so I've put my money where my
mouth is
I believe everything that I say
sincerely I put it into practice I'm at
once a product of all the shit that's
going on and I feel like I'm working on
solution to everything what's going on
and there's a there's a congruence to my
personal experience my personal
narrative the world around me and the
work I'm doing
that's very fulfilling and I'm it's
giving me energy
it's inspiring to others and to myself
and so I'm just continuing to move
towards that energy and to move towards
these positive solutions because despite
the criticisms that you've you've
elicited from me despite this this
shit-talking that
in this episode I am generally very
focused on how to move forward
positively in a constructive manner that
that is good for me my family my
community and my nation and this is this
is how I'm doing it and this is this is
the reward that I'm getting and it's
feels good man to be honest feels great
well very well said I think we'll end
the session there I think you explained
where you're coming from and what most
importantly what you're trying to do you
know you're certainly part of this 4G
war that we're all fighting where we're
you know building our own independent
but interoperating entities that's
exploring the space of what comes next
yeah absolutely and I'm happy to talk to
you again later about more explicitly
game B strategies game B communities
decentralized networks emerging networks
you know I've had ongoing conversations
with Jordan Holland and John rabe and
others that are working in the space
I've I've reviewed Jordans new covenant
document as well so I'm very up to speed
on where the thought process is and you
know we're just trying to do our part
right we want to build this community in
a 21st century way that focuses on
emergence we've designed the community
itself for emergence we're starting in a
very localized level on individual you
know relationships and we're trying to
build something that's going to grow in
a decentralized way that's gonna have a
very powerful effect so happy to
continue that conversation very happy to
have been with you Jim I've been a fan
of yours for a number of years I know
that you've been involved in some very
interesting and important work all over
the country and just for for many years
now so when you asked for me to come on
I was I was very pleased and excited to
do it and I'd be happy to come back and
talk to you any time yeah that's great
let's do it let's have a what comes next
big change coalition game be plus plus
conversation definitely
[Music]
production services and audio editing by
jerod Jane's consulting music by Tom
Muller at modern space music