all right welcome to the idea cafe Thank
You Kim in I forgot to ask Kirsten if
that's how you I say your name before
Kirsten Berbick oh so the question we
are all gonna answer today is how do we
carry on after less than desirable
behavior of a teacher has been revealed
and I don't normally give a description
I just do the question but I'm just
going to read the description today -
after stories have recently come to
light about Kyle sees how do we use the
teachings that appeal to us to overcome
the emotions and heal ourselves can we
keep the teacher teachings and ditch the
teacher so would anyone like to start
answering the question I'm always okay
to start if nobody else does I can start
when you said that I mean I immediately
had this image of being shipwrecked
because you think you're in and that and
then that brings me to the image of
being quarantined on a boat outside of
its ill Ammar and then that brings me to
these yeah so I just see the world in
pictures when you win something a
bombshell hits that you didn't see
coming
the first thing that happens is shock
and the next thing that happens is am I
still alive and the next thing that
happens is are my friends still alive
and then grief sets in because you have
grief for the safety of the vessel you
have grief for the passengers lost at
sea
you have grief for the fact that that
that that line is still selling tickets
on other cruises that could suffer the
same fate you have you've lost trust in
the safety of the whole system not just
the vessel and then without a captain on
the ship there starts to be all kind of
fragments there's people who want to
make money off the passengers to give
them safe passage to shore there's
people who who don't know how to swim
but they panic and so they jump
overboard anyway and get thrown to the
Sharks there's I mean images of the
Titanic I I just have so there's so much
there's so much truth in all the movies
we've ever seen about shipwreck and then
it brings me to to the big book of
Alcoholics Anonymous where we are like
people who've survived a shipwreck we
bond if we survive and and we hold each
other up and we empower each other and
we find out how to be our own leader and
how to access our own source and how to
grow in our own strength in ways that we
never could alone and that's what AAA
found in the beginning of their years
was we're gonna die separately or we're
gonna bond together and honestly the
tenets that make a a safe for the people
inside are the same tenets that would
make this shipwreck and people who who
find themselves afloat after an incident
it would help them bond together and
that is that when you first land in that
choppy water you're not caring which
which boat sends you a life raft you're
just caring that somebody cares to pluck
you out of the water and when somebody
throws me a life raft I don't soar a
lifesaver I don't say oh no I don't like
the flavor of that one I'm gonna wait
for the net no but no I'm gonna hold on
tight and hope that there's a rescue
ship coming soon and what happens is is
the fractioning is everybody trying to
find their way and ultimately without a
captain there can be a mutiny there can
be all kind of things happen they can
end up being like the Donner Party and
eat their young
you know all my pictures that's my
thought thank you can would you like me
to go here sooner would you like to go
that looked like I didn't know you yet
it looked like I said yeah I can go
that's what that means not right there
um I see things and images too but I've
been really experiencing so much feeling
not just emotional feeling but
sensational feeling as well and I
the first sensation I felt was as if
everything just fell off of me as if all
weight clothing story concerns
everything it all just fell away and it
was like coming home with a bunch of
groceries and having all this stuff fall
out of your hands and you have to go oh
crap I got to pick this up like which
things do I need to put in the
refrigerator first which things need to
are perishable I need to you know be
saved at that moment and that it almost
it turned into a cool I get to choose
what I'm keeping and what I'm not
keeping um I got stuck just a little bit
inside of how the am I'm gonna use
the teachings that this guy taught me
that I is like just hearing his name is
making me feel nauseous and yet there
was a deeper truth behind that when I
would ask that from that very egoic
concerned space of my brain there was
something that rose from below the
sensation of truth a sensation of use
what's true use what's true and what I
know to be true is what I've practiced
and what I've done over the two years
that I'd been working with him and what
has I would say neurologically become
like habit firming sitting still
listened it listening to my own emotion
feeling the sensation of the emotion
come to my awareness and being with that
part of me that felt so hurt and there's
another component that came through that
was just holding gratitude for who that
person was in that time to be able to
teach me this because I feel we're all
multifaceted
and we can all make really up
choices and yet we can all still
fundamentally be genuinely at our core
good people and I see that in this
person but I also see the unwillingness
to step forward and take that control
but take take ownership of behavior of
actions of the hurt that's been caused
and I got lost in my own what I was
saying if we are all deeply good
I can still trust at the moments that I
was connected and felt that he was
coming from that space that that was
good but I can also definitely tap in to
the moments where sensation told me what
or sensation was tipping me off in
teachings with him or at Asilomar in
November there are moments where there
were those little things that I had
squashed down the sensations I had
squashed down because everything else
was so grand and so fine and perfect and
I had healed but who was doing the work
I was doing the work I was taking the
concepts and adapting them into my life
and so therefore God it's just it's just
such a clusterfuck of a question it's
like so abstract
you know like yeah do I Kim said it's so
great and one of her one of her posts
about us run out the baby with the
bathwater
not gonna do it not gonna do it because
I know what has healed me and it's the
dichotomy of having
amazing gifts from this person that
unfortunately isn't who they claim to be
Thank You Kirsten so I will share for my
up to five minutes this is a weird
position to be in having this stuff come
out a few weeks ago because I was
already on the periphery of this
community
I discovered Kyle three years ago and he
was instrumental at that point in my
life and figuring out how to Stephanie
to my power and do what I am here to do
in the world would just create a world
of abundance and peace for every single
human being on this planet and I also
face health challenges that make that
nearly impossible to do in a way that
society would say you're supposed to do
it and so I used a lot of his teachings
I did this hundred video series on my
apples from my apple tree on just
creating like a hundred ideas that were
sparked I gave myself two weeks and I
was done in three days and using you
know the the the vision exercises that I
didn't want to give the name of because
it's got his name in it and there were
so many tools that weren't they worked
they proved themselves to me so it's not
really him that he's the one who
introduced me to them but they're not
his I mean generally a lot of them he
actually they're in common with other
coaches and leaders but this idea that I
had him on a pedestal because in this
project that I'm doing this world saving
project it was like very easy to be like
I can send people to him to do that
piece of the work right the inner
working and that piece of like learning
how to sit with your body learning how
to follow the next GPS coordinate I can
I don't have to do that I think I can
send them to him and after this like
falling from a pedestal that I didn't
even really realize I had him on I was
like oh not only was he telling the
truth that he's not the leader in a real
true way that we all can be the leaders
we all can come together and create the
actual world-changing leadership that
isn't around one person that is
interconnected and one of us
seems to take a break another person who
step in and we're feeling low we can ask
for help and when we're feeling a
message come through that anyone can
share and part of the reason I wasn't
involved in the even the everything
access pass was that 30 bucks a month
was a barrier to me and for a lot of the
people that he brought in they've spent
tens of thousands of dollars to get the
kernel of truth that he was giving to
people and I can only imagine feeling
the emotion that comes without much
money feeling like it was wasted you
know I've spent $1,000 and even that of
like where can I get that back from but
the truth is this is coming up it's like
my university degree I spent tens of
thousands of dollars on and at the end I
had knowledge but I didn't have a job
out of it and if I could have given back
that money I kept the education like
just that they've given back the money
for the piece of paper but kept the
education I absolutely would have and so
I'm gonna look at it like that or I'm
like I would I would give back the money
but not that the information if I could
you know you sever that tie with him but
I accept what I've gotten over the last
three years that that journey that
growth is on me and now I have to figure
out how to bring that into my work
without putting it off on other people
and part of that is creating a coaching
type community that anyone can be a part
of and how do we bring in coaches and
people who want to be coached and do it
in a way that's financially viable
emotionally viable all of these all of
these things and so thank you both for
being here and that is my my five
minutes now unmute everyone and we can
happen open conversation something I
brought up Kristin when you were talking
I was involved in a cult my my first
religious experience was not as a child
I was 27 28 found a very charismatic
leader who had 100 or 150 people
following him in Las Vegas and and it
was love it was authentic what looked to
me like authentic family love
which was something that I was really
not raised with and I and I was drawn by
the way it felt to be there and I was
drawn by the absolute approval of people
and my children very young and I was
married to their father at the time and
and as we were in there over the course
of time the guy became more and more ego
driven and began to do things that were
not being done in the beginning in the
beginning he had another job after that
he stopped and started taking me from
the church and then he started
orchestrating marriages and divorces and
then he bought a motor home and took his
lovely new bride that he had stolen away
from one of the family members on a
vacation and while he was gone the
people started to talk not many of them
just three or four of the intercourse
started to compare notes and that is the
downfall of any of these systems as long
as you can keep people from talking and
really comparing notes but this broke
when somebody shared their feelings with
with a primary victim and and and they
told their secret and then and then it
shifts everything so what we did after
that was we the five of us there were
five families who by the time he got
back we knew some truths that you
couldn't unsee but but the but the
training that's from inside of the cult
had been you know if they leave they're
not part of us and they get shunned and
they just want to cause division I see
some similarities here and so and so
there were the five of us and we started
a little home fellowship group write it
the same patterns that I see and our
pact was we would not shy away from the
truth if anybody asked us we would tell
them the truth
but we wouldn't go back in and try and
pull people out of it because you know
if you're not ready to be here you're
not ready here and over time people
would begin to come out and ask us why
we left and we would tell them the whole
truth and nothing but the truth and and
before long the media got wind of it
review-journal in Las Vegas the
newspaper got me wound of it and exposed
this guy he was a pedophile he was a
registered sex offender who never
registered in Vegas
he took everybody who was following and
moved to Oregon onto a base and you know
probably 50 of the people went with him
and the other 50 fell away and after all
of that all of that to say this I had to
go back to every teaching because my
life was different and better because of
the teaching not because of the what
turned out to be an authentic so the
truth is of truth no matter where you
find it and when this split happened in
the eol community I felt the same way
and that is that you have to go back and
search that truth for yourself I went
back to the Bible because that was the
that was the container and I read
everything with its fresh and eyes is
this true for me or was this tainted is
this true for me or is this tainted and
I'm doing the same thing with this stuff
from Kyle and it is because like I love
that that's part of my life and yet when
I say it to other people who are
evacuees they get triggered right well
is it true for me or not and I have to
hold what's true for me and every single
person who gets plucked out of that or
chooses to leave that is going to
experience the same or else they're
gonna run off and find another somebody
to follow and that's okay if that's
their next thing it just doesn't happen
to be mine that's really interesting on
my background for me this is the third
time I have had a follower someone who I
was on the periphery of I owned their
CDs or I owned their their books and the
first time it was devastating because it
was like I basically have to be I'm
triggered by these books I'm triggered
by the words that he used and so I can't
keep any of it and it's stuff that is I
get over the course of a decade or more
since I first heard about it I have
incorporated more of the pieces that
were true for me and let the rest go and
I'm still a little triggered by him when
I see him himmat in
community and now like this happened
with Kyle I the whole time I was
learning from him I was a discerning is
this for me
right his money piece I got his money
book and I watched his documentary and
really liked the documentary but the
book I'm like all these coaches who make
thousands and tens of thousands of
dollars telling people that if they
don't make that they're not you know it
like the money will find you the health
will find you if you're living the right
path and I find that so broken because I
know tons and tons of culture to it
you're wrong to charge I know and so
you're not listening to your inner guide
and yes we live in a world you need to
make money but if you're not listening
to your inner gut it's like they make
money and then say anyone can do it and
clearly not everyone can do it some of
us it's actually out of alignment for us
to be doing those things and so how to
honor those of those and yet the pattern
at this time I was more prepared because
of the history and honor that Isabella
that's saying that sounds like this
pattern of like okay cool the universe
going have you got this lesson yet okay
have you got yeah oh hey check it out
this time right and I knew you as having
this leadership role in this it is so
amazing I was so excited these videos
from you someone that I didn't know but
I feel I know we're in the container
that is you know the same swimming in
the same time and I found him my
background is an improvisational comedy
so there was a similarity you know you
look at algorithms of Facebook and it
was oh you like meditation you like
comedy check this guy out
and it was like fun and the work I do is
very similar but I work with teams
mostly and I was in a pretty big funk
and I saw this video and I was like who
the is this guy doing what I do so
immediately
ego is tripped and I'm like I just sit
and listen and there was something that
I absolutely believed I was called
do this I was I believe I was called to
listen to him and to watch his stuff and
to be a student of his but not from the
space of like it hit me pretty early on
even on our calls and I was in the 7:30
group of cam that's where we met there
would be people who would just you could
see their faces like oh you know like
Kyle and I I had something that was
connected to his energy like this
excitement about learning more and I
guess because it comes through him as a
vessel or any individual as the vessel
some people depending on where they are
can really really grab on to that but I
I had said to somebody at one point it's
sort of like oh we lost kick it look
like and we follow the Lincoln come back
innovation kind of like watching old
videos of Elvis or of the Beatles and
watching an entire audience lose their
mind like screaming their face off and I
never had that with him I never felt
like I needed to get myself you know
girls in the room or any of that most of
all none of that and I think so much it
what had to do with my being around male
comedians for 27 years and there was
very much a part of me within being
around male comedians for so long that
would emasculate and defend and I'll be
the first one to throw the punches so
that I let you know where I stand as a
female you know and I noticed myself
even at the end of our thing I did that
I kind of set him in his place
and then I let him know what it meant to
me to have found him but yeah it comes
back but that's okay I hear you however
if you're muted on your end you're not
muted owners
No yeah so not working you can go out
and back in and sometimes that that
helps it's like turning it off in a
hunting reboot but but yeah so I suppose
there were already patterns in my own
past of protection keeping myself kind
of at an arm's distance from the
individual but not from what it was that
was really speaking to me and that was
that I was engaged in that was proving
to be really beneficial yeah so funny
because one of them and I don't know
whether this is the learning it might
just be going through anger but the
three people I've encountered that got
that pedestal like fell off the pedestal
we're all men and they're all around
sexual stuff it's all of em so like part
of me is like I'm done with male
teachers I want because none of the
female teachers have that happen they
have different kinds of scandal but it's
not in authenticity and lying and
covering stuff up it's like I followed
teal Swan and she had a scandal because
she had a lot of stuff released in the
media for Samsung suicide I'm like if
you were following her you knew her
stance and you're good like it's not
like an angel light out of out of the
context right and so I'm so grateful
that you're in this space especially
doing what Kyle can do right there like
showing up being funny doing the
transformational work and especially for
teens so that is that is n as a woman
looks like I think that is it's just the
safer ones I don't like I'm again I
don't know if it's coming from anger but
it's like I'm just kind of done I'm done
with and it doesn't you're not gonna be
friends or I'm not gonna listen to
anything they say but to make it teacher
of mine no well that's the other
component too is that I grappled in the
very beginning with I still love this
person I still have love for this
individual do I want to go and do
another workshop mm-hmm do I want to do
a retreat hell to the No
but the deepest part of
hopes and sends energy around getting
help
mm-hmm around finally fessing up around
just you know we see you we are not
bullshitters yeah and and you can't
 a bullshitter
you just can't and you know I had to
then make peace with that not happening
right away he didn't and it still hasn't
and so therefore that expectation or
reality that's gone
that was a made-up concept in my mind
but I think many of us were on that boat
hoping that it would happen so then I
shift and put my focus to okay great
what we're gonna be of service now and
it was with the direct the people
directly around me it's funny I've been
not purposely rewatching but every so
often in LA like because of what I'm you
know just researching stuff I deny all
these video will pop up and I'll you
know listen if like it clicked on out
here and be you and whenever the audio
clip is I'm always like in 2020 Kyle
listen to 2014 Kyle can 2020 Kyle listen
to 2018 Kyle like can we send him his
own content cuz it's like the money will
fall away and there'll be something else
there right when the world crumbles
there's something else there and there's
this truth and I don't know I hope this
doesn't apply to you and your work but
like when because of his branding right
that it was one all about authenticity
this stuff was clearly gonna come to
light there was no way it wasn't gonna
come to light mm-hmm welcome back in
making yeah I don't remember what I was
about to say the Brandi and Kyle 14 Kyle
listening to twenty or twenty twenty
Kyle was something about you guys can
talk and I'll figure out what it I'm
sure what I miss I remember it there's
this band of allowable wear leg so
Kyle's of all be not loud if he heals
himself he can't do that anymore and so
and at the same time if he doesn't heal
himself enough like he's kind of doing
right now over he's
just a little boy and just then he can't
be the teacher and so it's like it has
to keep him in this band and it's like
that's not what I want is a leader I
want to be able to grow and grow and
grow and heal and heal and heal without
needing to you don't I mean like if it's
done if I don't think I think we know
that it's a process and it never gets
finished yeah if you get too far beyond
people they don't look at you like
you're evolving with them and so it's
that that like in between or it's like
you can't be under and you can't be over
you have to be just over the people you
know that's that's really I like that
it's it brings up for me I've had
several instances in my life so I can
again call those patterns where I've
gotten to a place with a certain teacher
in improvisation or in acting or in
whatever modality I'm learning at the
time where I get to the point where okay
cool
okay I've learned it all now what and
they're basically like well I help us
teach the new people and I go home but I
want to keep going I want to what's next
what's next and I was feeling that with
this cuz I felt like okay yeah I've
heard that before
okay yeah-oh heard that a lot okay you
know getting to and it wasn't in an ago
ik place of like Jesus you're just
talking about the same thing all the
time shut up there was none of that I
was patient with it but also going hmm
like it's time to move on I was pretty
certain at a silymarin November I needed
to move on but it took me a while to do
that a couple months and then finally I
quit the ATP calls and done this all so
yeah I like the Wits is like the
students are passing the master right
and I think that a lot of us without
realizing it had become more authentic
and more of a vessel of our healing and
truth using the methods he taught so
thank you but like then we're also not
standing for the BS like we're not
standing for you not listening to your
own you not showing up and being
authentic you not owning this and
letting it crumble and see what else is
there take that leap ready which I also
get
in a different spot I'm a poor person I
don't have much to fall financially you
know like what if this cost me 100
subscribers there's that too that's also
the band right is like you have to get
successful enough people can look up to
you but then once you're so successful
you can't take those leaps not really
not at the same level you could before
so it's a marketing tool yes it's also
an authenticity tool which is the brand
which is the problem and I and I find
the most fascinating and I don't know
what I missed in your conversations is
that is that so here we are this first
wave of evacuees who know how to sail
our own boat who have formed a regalia
okay so we're all we're all moving the
same direction with different speeds and
different sails and different labels are
gay and and we've all in one way or
another tried to go back to him and say
hey you need to repair this sail your
jörgen landed on the rocks over there
and we care about you
fix your sail get back in the game and
he's been full ass denial but there was
anything wrong with his boat and he's
continuing to take on water and more
people which is going to overload the
boat again there's gonna be another wave
that's what we feel energetically it's
been three weeks of front-line hell and
it's only been three weeks there's
another wave and as long as he's doing
this unconsciously consciously
unconscious
you know this his he is authentically
and authentic but doesn't see it you
hear that right you feel that we see it
we so it's not just oh God we know more
than the teacher no no no no he is in
full ass protecting the income stream at
the cost of the people who are paying
him yeah and I knew there was a one-off
or a two off but when I saw the rest of
what started coming through firsthand
I've got first-hand people with
first-hand knowledge then I saw a
pattern of predatory behavior and you
can go back to the 2014 I'm guessing you
can go back further than that and oh by
the way I've got some screenshots of
some stuff from Facebook post up is from
many years ago this is who he is this is
who he is this is not who he markets but
this is who he is
yeah controlling the narrative was a big
thing there were two things that came up
for me right away one was he's
controlling your narrative and number
two was he has he has it's a total
misuse of power total misuse of power so
regardless of whether or not he knew
there were victims
anytime someone in a role of leadership
is having any kind of favoritism amongst
any of his it could be a boss it could
be you know a family dynamic if one
child is held as a favorite amongst
everyone else not energy is in the
container and that was obvious and when
it's obvious within say the computer of
7:30 calls where there would be people
who would well I texted you that and
it's like oh oh I don't have Kyle's
personal number I can't text Kyle oh
this you know what I mean it can be it
can just be that kind of oh I could
privately come to you with some wisdom
house right or person help or whatever
but that is messing with the dynamic of
what you're trying to do it's messing
with your ability to be taken seriously
by everybody to not to really back up
what you say you're gonna do though how
are you not a liar how are you actually
doing this that's a lot of people like
that that's a lot of people to be able
to
throw out your number two and then
expect them to just be okay with you not
responding you know and then be like
well whatever I can't respond to
everyone I'm a busy person what was the
message you were sending
and what message did they think was
happening you know what was their
reality these are all things like group
dynamics stuff is so important it's not
just you man
not when you're being this close to
everybody well and not when the when
you're you know you using it for your
personal dating pool which is an and if
you look at if you look at the large
majority of the people who he has who've
paid him for him to have sexual contact
with them okay they are from the ones
who got into the inner circles of the
daily work the daily calls with kiled
now I don't I don't know what kind of
access he had before that you know the
groupie or the fan base or whatever but
this that this is coming from are the
ones who were doing deep inner work and
transformation every day five days a
week for six months so he knew exactly
where they were week where they needed
who would need the extra tension and not
only that set that up with that
favouritism set up competition for his
affection so he absolutely he has this
all about ego you know I mean he is
driven by two things that that call it
five-year-old I don't give a but
but you're responsible for what you do
in that 40 year old body and this is
grooming from day one absolute grooming
from the first time you see a video and
it's amazing it's $20 and then it's $100
and then it's a flow group and then it's
a Dolby and then it's a and and before
you know it
that's how and he targets he doesn't
target just anybody mm-hmm it is that
marketing system is designed to hit
intelligent articulate educated and a
flow
women over 40 it is by design and then
we run around thinking in our little
girl body there's something wrong with
us why didn't he pick me here or why
didn't I see this jackass comin yes but
still the focus is always on me and his
intent when he meets with them one on
one is to turn the focus off of him and
on to you for your inner work because if
you're disturbed there's something wrong
with you completely smoke and mirrors
what he is barred in this and it's
effective with wounded women but you
don't get to do that you don't get to do
that and get away with it and his
mistake is that people are talking and
what does he do it Asilomar he puts them
on forty hours of silence so
they won't talk to us on the outside so
they won't talk among themselves turning
forty hours of violent hours yes
normally it's one night right it's like
a knife yeah that's exactly right and we
were there on site and people were
coming to say it just helps to know that
there's an alternative it helps with
some people left and didn't go back in
some people were left and got a band-aid
and went back in we were just there and
if and if the universe brought somebody
to ask the question
we told him whatever truth they could
handle okay in the moment and and on day
two he put him into 40 hours of silence
and while they were in silence is when
he came to us to have this meeting and I
know he imagined he was going to be able
to Kyle his way back in that of course
didn't happen and he does there anything
we said the irony on all of this is one
that that pattern plays out on in nearly
every cult every self-help everything
that is run by a male is that and and so
it to me I was talking actionable you
were cut off that I'm like I'm kind of
done with male leaders I just kind of
want the female ones I'm just maybe some
trans women I'm like I
does not desist Matt I'm done with that
and that might be my anger and I might
move biast that but it's happened
repeatedly I'm like maybe I'm just not
supposed to have the male teachers but
that pattern of like finding the
vulnerable grooming them doing that
piece but the issue is exactly what you
said about the marketing who he targeted
we're great for grooming and also now
that has hit the fan we're all so
we know how to stand in our power and
truth partly with your lessons thank you
that's absolutely right that's
absolutely right because all we did it
Asilomar and there were four people on
my team they're on the ground all we did
was meditate and wait that's all we did
I could go in I did not want to get up
one morning I'm tired but it was like
you know I need I'm just gonna go in and
get coffee in the main room I went and
got my coffee sat in front of the
fireplace I swear to God I wasn't there
30 seconds and somebody I never met came
over to sit down and talk not didn't
start out to talk even about the event
she saw you Ferriero el and I said you
know I have a ticket I chose not to use
it and as soon as I said that safe place
we have to talk okay all right here you
go
so and that and what I learned over and
over everything that I've learned that
the parts that I learn about this being
out here on our own that confirmed the
training that that we have the same
source that the universe has got that
that all I have to do is meditate and
educate and allow whatever has got to
happen to happen has put me in a
perceived position of leadership and a
stronger voice than I have ever been
willing to stand in in my life and
without this particular community that I
had grown so close to and this
particular drama that I have that I know
how to navigate we wouldn't be having
this conversation at anyway thank you
but I didn't get here alone we got here
on the strength of each other
no matter what was going on with Kyle no
matter
our head was saying we bonded I don't
know about the other calls but the 7:30
call a lot of us we bonded but even then
we've seen this people don't know how to
act when this happens they they distance
rather than go into the thing and I I
would I thought today somebody told me
today about a congressional discussion
last night that was a live stream and
they were talking about their calling
quarantine social distancing because
quarantine was scary so in the u.s.
we're gonna call it social distancing
and and but what they said and I found
this fascinating because I just did this
video about fires and first responders
people can social distance and you can
stay at home and quarantine until it all
blows over but the first responders
don't have that luxury the first
responders don't get to quarantine and
not only that but they are exposed to
more but they have more exposures
because they're on the frontline in the
hospitals or whatever so they have a
much higher likelihood of getting sick
or burning out than the people who get
to go into 14 days of I don't have to
check Facebook and we see that happening
in the groups those of us who for
whatever reason found ourselves on that
first wave of here I've got up I have a
life raft come on and got out now we're
holding each other up because we're on
the frontlines and if you're on the
frontlines you don't get to you ever get
to well that's that's what's been
fascinating too is watching the
evolution day by day I I was very very
conscious of it's day three it's only
day five guys I would continue marrying
that back to everybody because
everyone's emotions were erupting such
different spaces and what actually oddly
enough had really come to the surface
for me at Asilomar was I know how to
read trauma in people's bodies based on
how they're showing up I mean here I
that these were all things I learned as
an actor uh you know how do you show
this emotion through your whole body so
everyone knows you're so overwhelmed
right but no it's actually me watching
someone opening up to a trauma and
seeing oh my gosh they're five years old
right now and then oh whoa
they're right there they're
communicating right now from their
teenage level or ooh ooh that that seven
year old is pretty spunky and it's gonna
say no screw you you know and so it's
fascinating to me and so I was taking
that knowledge with me and watching
reading the post the original post but
then also reading our own little group
that we had created to hold each other
and I would just use that and say I've
got you whatever you need and as I would
send like little messages to that person
individually what can I do to help you
doing triage without it being in front
of everybody without it being let me
call you out and hurt you worse which is
and like like you said no one knows how
to do this well that's kind of the thing
is that we're in a space right now where
we are I've said this before we're
making this all up we are learning how
to be in this new normal because our
normal of coming together was this
community he had created and now the
normal is well if he's not part of
this how do we then help each other and
so to follow that kind of the flow of
that and and using the instinct to go
okay this is a good time to come in and
help and this is a good time to let them
just do what they need to do and say
what they need to say it's just been an
amazing space of first of all listening
to what it is I'm being called to do and
asked to do to serve versus where I was
from day one probably into day seven
which was a forward motion action and
then it hit me and I wrote a post about
it which was oh here's how I respond
when has
the fan I can look back to 911 that's
how I responded I can look back to
family crisis that's how I responded and
that all came from a familial pattern
and then I can also go into cool oh and
this is how I am with women because
we're primarily women in this group okay
great so this is what I know about those
now that I have the awareness I have a
choice of how to proceed
do I want to proceed in that thing like
where the hens in the henhouse just
complaining about everything or do I
want to help motivate to move forward
and so I would just motivate to move
forward when I could and step back when
it wasn't working because that's okay
they needed to process they were at
different levels of processing and
having more eruptions explosion
internally that needed to happen you
know we're normally shutting each other
down we're normally saying ah how dare
you say that oh please say that please
say that you need to express the
that's been sitting in your body so then
it can go away to where it needs to go
[Music]
like when hits the fan what you
show up and do and mine is completely
different and yet so needed it's like
how we all show up right that we all
have different first responders first
responders have very particular training
right on how to fight a fire how to be a
nurse how to be an EMT and they have to
show up to be the same but we don't we
get to bring that authenticity in our
uniqueness to this because how I showed
up was like I want to decentralize
coaching I want a platform that we all
can go to and the code you can get paid
d-doesn't lee and yet we don't have to
pay a lot I want to be able to do video
calls of people I want to do pure
coaching I want to do and I don't want
to do it alone I can't do it alone I
don't have the capacity to do it alone
this is what I can do is have a
conversation and so allowing myself to
be me helps me show up so much more like
I am saving the world with conversations
and that sounds ridiculous even though
that up and experiencing it for months
but it's like no having any ability to
show up and just express yourself
not necessarily live or everyone's gonna
see it on YouTube right but like what if
everyone had a space like this
it could be like Kyle and come together
and say what do we do without what do we
do now you're in the anger phase let's
you like they meet Mondays pick a time
during the grief phase they meet
Tuesdays pick a time right and that's a
zoom call and anyone can pop in or pop
out that's good there's so much we can
do from where we are hmm yeah I have a
resource I know about so Jubilee after
the call let me connect you like that
it's possible almost I was actually did
a video on my other YouTube channel
Jubilee saves the world by me and Riaan
through life was talking about social
distancing now that everyone's inside to
creating the scheduling app for video
which I was trying to do and trying to
get but I was trying to convince
introverts they want it and they're like
I don't want to be on video like you
don't even know and I'm like they know
they want human connection so how do we
get it to them when they're doing
because you don't need to not check
Facebook you need to not high-five
people right when this help it's helpful
I get the connection and if we can
connect humanity during this pandemic
crisis we're not going to go back to the
other way right we're not gonna get
Facebook and Twitter and be like oh this
is barely connection when you have real
connection for people so yes any any
resource towards that direction
I am totally done with Kim and even
you're saying that it's like you could
say oh this Kyle thing but it's just
that's just one like microcosm this can
go into corporations and school
absolutely any nation of people but then
also I'm sensing this whole concept with
coronavirus all of the energy feels so
similar to me yeah it feels like they
are all coming down in our faces in
particular at the same time because if
we can do it in this small container of
his world we can certainly do it in the
container of the next few people outside
of us in our own community who are
really losing their or who are like
a cool whatever I don't
need to be worried well maybe a little
worried might be okay that's that's so
interesting because when you were
talking Jubilee I was thinking the same
thing I was thinking I wonder if anybody
else here is sensing that this is just a
training ground for us yeah but this is
what's evolving emerging is so much
bigger than Kyle sees and it is and it
is why we have been prepared and it is
why we came together and the universe is
just as invested in this this union of
whatever is happening yeah as he was in
the trainer that that taught us the
skills that would bring us here a step
further and say yeah and and even though
we're angry with him and like all about
him right now go back to the gratitude
oh thank you thank you so much for
putting us here so we can catapult past
you that's that's wonderful thank you
for the chipwrecked came forward and
thanked him for having done it because
it's like this event and even the
coronavirus it's like this event can
bring us together and we from the
teachings at least for me from him is
like oh I'm actually I have this really
weird medical condition where I can't
handle stress and I've been given the
message on how to save humanity and like
those two things don't align it so I've
had to figure out how to de-stress my
life in a way where like things that
trigger other people don't trigger me
and things that don't trigger other
people trigger me like I'm like I can't
make a recipe that's too much stress but
I can take on the entire world
cool that's interesting but like part of
it is through him like it's like oh just
another thing there's opportunity here
when you approach it authentically and
you look for what you can do magic
happens and we're all like it's like
part of he's like it's this Truman Show
like it's the whole universe exists just
to teach me my lessons and yes but it
exists for everyone else as well like
I'm like did this thing happen with Kyle
just so I could step into my power
yes and everybody else it's not all
about me not that you go centric but it
feels so weirdly exactly the right time
and like if this was I can't imagine not
encountered aisle three years ago what
if I was first encountering his work now
during this division and it's like there
has to be places for people to go so let
me ask a question I mean I know you have
questions but now I have a question yeah
so so on the island of Kauai II they had
a you know a a washout between the north
and the south side of the island and
there were a lot of tourists on the
north shore that needed to get to the
airport on the south side and so there
were people you know how you know you
look for the helpers there were boats
running people back and forth across the
Great Divide like crazy but there was
one or two rogue people who would put
people on a boat take them far from
shore and say what do you got in your
wallet because otherwise you can get out
and swim I'm not even kidding you there
are in any Katahdin catastrophic event
people who are going to step in to take
advantage and because there's so much
else going on they can slide right in
sight unseen unnoticed and do damage
that's sort of that's sort of the red
flag I want to wave mm-hmm that says
just because this just because the other
people in this room are evacuees doesn't
mean that they're not going to try and
take advantage of your vulnerability
when you're not expecting it and if that
happens again that's when those people
start jumping over a guard and saying
I'll take my I'll take my chances with
the Sharks because this is up
that's what I as I as I work with groups
I'm not convinced at all that there can
never be a truly a safe group on
Facebook but I think that that what I'm
seeing is is that you take people you
evacuate them from the immediate harm
and you put them in triage and you
understand that that's transition and
they understand that and then they go
from triage to either intensive care or
extended
or whatever but they're moving through
they're not finding a new home with this
new people who are going to lead them
out even though that's what they're
looking for we are ever as leaders
saying this is you're just passing
through and that's why I liked your
thing Jubilee about the buckets if
you're in grief Tuesday at 3:00 if
you're in if you're in anger
Monday at 3:00 if you're in sadness you
know whatever it is I really like that
but I also like the fact that there is a
methodology and I could just got the
download yesterday from the universe to
move through those phases so they know
just like when you're in hospital the
goal is not to stay in hospital the rest
your life the goal is to get in get
treated breathe again do rehab if you
need to it stepped down so you can get
back home and live independently on your
own that's what's missing it's not to
keep spending six thousand dollars in
event it is not to keep paying them and
honestly for what for the trauma that
has occurred and the therapy you're
gonna need afterward the money you're
spending on doctor Kyle now will buy you
a lot of healing on the outside mm-hmm
without running into another doctors
obviously and fix me fix me no no no no
I think it's important we keep those
things in mind both that there can be in
any crisis the opportunity for extreme
good and extreme bad and people who can
sense that and can warn people and can
without sit right I don't want to stop
trusting everyone always I don't want to
cut all men out of my life even if I'm
cutting them out as teachers some
mentors like you don't like to be able
to say this is what I need now to feel
safe I can't have a male teacher anymore
sorry like I'm in that space maybe later
not now and don't put to be able to say
what can make this Facebook group safe
right which is we maybe we allow
everyone in and then if people show up
in a bad way we know there's
screenshotting things that get kicked
out or you don't like those kind oh and
we haven't even said you can't
screenshot right like what are right how
do we make those rules and keep them
keep it say well yeah and yeah to do to
do those we are coming down
to the to the our and I'd like to keep
these two hours of people theoretically
could launch them so does anyone have
any closing thoughts they would like to
to get I just love that you're here I
just love that people are coming along
to help it makes mr. Rogers true in the
afternoon as well it's in the morning
and I appreciate that
thank you for for being the USU and for
bringing that forward so that we have a
space to be able to talk like this this
is really important stuff
thank you I'm going to do yeah well I
sense that what's gonna be hopefully
helpful for other people to see after
knowing what this conversation is now on
the other side of it is that hopefully
people will see that if they are in
those first phases of anger and despair
and they're still not sure how to get
out of it we did it we're there we're to
another level
come join us we're ready do we can help
you absolutely and then once we figure
out a system we can also take in all the
refugees right whether it's Kyle whether
it's my other two it's the other the
other ones right when you're a teacher
whatever teacher Falls and this is where
yeah the decentralization of like how do
we make sure because we were talking
about him having favorites I was like
that happens when you're a parent and
it's horrible right to be a kid that's
not the favorite or the favorite it
comes with different costs yeah but to
be a friend right everyone's got
favorite friends and not if like it's
like it's a more decentralized so if
it's like you're showing up and being
part of something there's gonna be
people you're more drawn to to make sure
everybody has someone and there isn't a
central leader that we're all Bonnie for
their attention even though there's
gonna be more charismatic people that
people are gonna be wanting to be next
to and talk to well and back to that a a
model they do that one on one sponsor
sponsee relationship not saying that's
the model we need but I'll tell you
there's a lot of healing self healing
leaderless support group because of
yeah it got they've done some things
very well all right thank you both for
joining we'll say goodbye to YouTube now
thank you