good morning and we're live which is
what my brother says every live video
starts with and it's not very enticing
and this is hope for a solution raisins
today it's just Eric and I and we're
talking about energy we've both seen the
produced by Michael Moore documentary
with Jeff Gibbs
something planet of humans which I'm
sure will end up coming up and this
woman since it came up in last one that
was just the medic connection this is
actually about energy so would you like
to start Eric on what what the current
shitshow of energy looks like I mean how
things work today yeah I mean it is as
you said a show I mean it really is
I mean our reliance on fossil fuels is
wholly unnecessary right I mean if if
alternative technologies particularly
storage technologies I mean it'll get
onto this I'm sure later on but
particularly storage technologies had
been pursued more earnestly from earlier
on but you know the necessity to double
down on oil I mean I estimates vary but
somewhere around the 1960s 1970s there
was an opportunity for us as a global
industrialized civilization to focus on
reducing our dependence on a resource
which we knew at some point sooner or
later was gonna run out right I mean it
you can argue about how long it was
going to take but the inevitability of
it's running out at some point you know
is unquestionable and so the wisdom of
building an entire societal
infrastructure on a resource which is
gonna run out you know what I mean it's
 insane and I see so for that
reason you know beyond anything else for
that reason yeah it's a complete
show so yeah how do we dig ourselves out
of this show well I mean assuming
that it's even possible to do so now at
this late stage it's gotta come on a
multitude of France right on the one
hand we've got to at an individual and
at an industrial and the societal level
we've got to reduce our energy
consumption until such time as we can
produce enough to increase our
consumption without it impacting at
see on the biosphere right when we can
do that then great we can start using
more but in the meantime we've got a
shoulder a little bit of the
responsibility right and voluntarily
just start using less energy in all in
in in all kinds of ways
number two is yeah obviously trying to
generate it in less impactful ways but
based on that documentary you've already
referred to it's not as easy to do there
and we come back to storage right I mean
the big the big problem with that
documentary highlights we'll the biggest
problem in apart from the general
capture of the green lobby book but on a
practical level the biggest problem it
highlights it was that things like wind
and solar are great right they do
generate power but you still have to
have gas and coal fire stations running
alongside them because when they're not
generating plainly something else to
take over and so the inability to store
the excess when they're producing excess
and use it at times when they're not
producing enough that's a huge block and
battery storage technology the patents
for battery technology are all owned by
Panasonic and Samsung or whatever I mean
even Elon Musk II does not make his own
batteries most people think he'll I must
make batteries he doesn't make batteries
he makes battery management technology
that's what that's what his patents are
his battery management systems he buys
millions and millions and millions of
double A batteries essentially from
Panasonic and sticks them together in
large packs and that that that's that's
that's where he gets his batteries from
so the relinquishing of the patents on
battery technology so that everyone in
their garage can just start pissing
about with batteries without having a
whole range of possibilities excluded
from them because of the patents of the
hell that's the biggest single blockage
to renewables is storage technology and
it's stuck because obviously the
existing companies have no interest in
allowing the marketplace to develop
things which are undercut their market
share and the oil companies have no
interesting storage technology being
developed which would make oil obsolete
and so we're we're stuck in this no
that's it that's that's that's that's
enough for me I've got five minutes I've
used over four that's enough I think
especially the
the fact that we are so reliance on
fossil fuels and wherever green energy
is it's not there yet and so green area
has to be green energy has to be able to
become more efficient and have
innovation while not mass producing it
quite yet because it's not yet efficient
it doesn't you don't get more energy out
of it than you put into it which doesn't
make any sense but producing them in a
smaller quantity or both getting into
the next topic instead of this one
currently we have to figure out how to
let go of our reliance on fossil fuels
both in energy and all the other things
that come from the petroleum byproducts
and our current renewable energy doesn't
quite get us there because it's entrance
and then of course the patent system
that whenever anyone comes up with
something that is innovative someone can
buy it and put it on the Shelf that the
patent system keeps people from
innovating that you can own it how do
you own a battery patents this many
years in like batteries didn't we didn't
come up with batteries a decade ago this
should be long now release the patents
of I do think there are energies out
there so this is one of those things I'm
not supposed to talk about and yet I
don't look at that world anymore
complete full transparency my family
invested in this company over a decade
ago that at the time was very close to
coming up with muon catalyzed fusion and
now has come up with it almost over a
decade ago but and this is where it's
either the world's worst Ponzi scheme
because they don't keep asking for money
they kind of have these understandable
investment things but they're like oh we
need to create this whole processing
plant into a we need to convert it it's
out of Australia and it's all there's
the possibility it's just BS right this
never happened it's just a Ponzi scheme
but if it's in any way real the fact
that it doesn't exist in the world right
now the fact that these people have this
hard of a time getting the word out
there the fact that they've had people
come and look at it from America that
like there's all these weird regulations
in the background of like if you come up
with a new source of energy that's
really a new source of energy not wind
and solar but something like neon
catalyzed fusion that you can't just
sell it to one person you
have to sell it to multiple countries at
the same time which makes sense you
don't want a new monopoly but like in
this you have people who of course their
entire fortresses on coal processing
plant supposedly this technology you can
retrofit coal processing plants you turn
ocean water into energy and then you do
have very plentiful I don't know about
the storage but if you're turning um
ocean water into energy you don't need
the storage right it's not you're
waiting for waves you're actually taking
the deutronium out of the water and
again I don't know if it's like I think
it's true that's why we invested in it
and all this time ten years later but
it's like the politics and the amount of
information they're like well we need
people to be positive about fusion when
they're not about fission because it's
not dangerous there isn't that but the
fact that nobody knows about it the fact
that it's not out there the fact that we
really need energy I'm like I don't
 care if I get trillions of
dollars out of this our planet needs
clean energy so why isn't this happening
and that's where I'm like as an investor
we're supposed to not talk about it and
I don't care anymore like I just don't
get legends like it's either real or
it's not and if it's real it needs to be
out there our investment be damned and
if it's not real but you know I mean
clearly that comes too late in it is a
kind of thing but it's like I think and
whether or not that's true I do think
things like that exists people come up
with technology and then it falls by the
wayside see their song buys a patent and
it sits on the shelf or even if you want
it to be out in the world even if you
wouldn't sell it to to one of the big
companies just for them to sit on the
shelf
you're still existing in that
marketplace how do you get the word out
how you get people to say okay is this
safe is it effective yet are we creating
an energy that's not like we're not
taking energy off the grid and
pretending we're making it
this isn't connected to anything is it
producing energy is it also producing
radiation you know do you mean like how
do you actually test it and then have a
way for it to be tested where you're not
stealing it right you're not gonna gonna
reverse manufacture it but considering
people don't think it's even possible
I don't know how universe manufacture it
but anyway that's just a little my
little rant about energy and how it is
sold and we can get it out there I'm
pissed
well it just it bring it brings up well
mentioned a few times in in these
conversations is that you know there are
oftentimes excellent solutions already
in existence right and yet they don't
they don't actually emerge into the
world right and so what what are the
reasons for that what are the barriers
to that and and and that is often I mean
I know this is a solution raising we're
here to talk about solutions but it but
if they already exist and it's just a
question of opening the gates to their
implementation then yeah there's no
point reinventing will that has already
been invented kind of thing right when
and a even if you do invent a wheel well
you're gonna run into the same problems
as this wheel is running into yeah it
more and more and more I'm coming around
thinking about why aren't these things
emerging into the world right and yeah
this is just one that you know about
there's also that I mean I don't know a
great deal about this but I read about
this in Scientific American or maybe New
Scientist whatever but it's got to be
getting on for 10 years ago I read about
these thorium reactors right which are
nuclear reactors but it's not using
uranium or plutonium there is no
possibility of meltdown right they're
not operating at these kinds of energies
that could cause meltdown the end
products of the process is not this
toxic material that sits around for a
hundred thousand years you know emitting
radiation you know all of those major
problems of nuclear energy are solved in
fact it uses waste from a different
generation of reactor right it uses that
as its raw material to derive energy
from and turns it into a far far far
less toxic material so you know it's
good in many many many ways a lot of the
fears surrounding nuclear energy are
taken away by this technology now why
that hasn't been pushed along you know
what I mean in terms of its development
and and scalability I don't know there
may be technical reasons possibly that
I'm unaware of that was one of the young
one of the conversations I had with
somebody and they talked I like very
like nucular it's like new killers the
devil because I throw in two new killer
is not a solution of my books and they
talked about exactly that but there are
things that argue aren't losing
determine which is about that so let's
say from ocean waters that aren't
uranium that don't have this high
half-life you
have to keep hold of for thousands of
years and say wait why are why are the
reason we create each you you Tonio
duranium is because it is weapon abble
whereas this other one isn't weaponize
Abul so don't line it so we don't have
it so and i'm like i'm like it doesn't
make any sense to make weapons out of
this stuff because we don't want our
world to be radioactive I mean all of
these things don't make sense if
technology exists right now in any any
of the technology there isn't a way to
get it to market there's ways to do that
if the patent system is what's breaking
us there's ways to overcome that which
we're showing during COBIT nineteen that
you know and people don't really care
about the patent system it's saving
people's lives if there's a way to bring
stuff to market a way to know what
exists currently but like that's not one
person's proprietary information it's
just like on the periodic table there is
elements that don't break down as
radioactive like and so why aren't we
using them and what's stopping us and
having that information be much more
available to to every everybody so that
we can then say right it's not new
killers bad no nuclear it's a certain
kind of new killer that's that's bad and
then how can we make it safe and what
else is out there when someone comes up
with an idea being able to actually
what's the word critique it look at what
what is good and bad about it and what
is possible is is new but this idea that
we have to what currently exists exists
and so you have to almost be perfect to
overcome it it's like okay gases is and
oil is destroying our environment but we
understand that one a little bit so then
if you're like right so so you want
catalyze fusion it's like whole but that
could be radioactive oh there could be
implications we don't understand it's
like yes but we can see its million
times better than gas and oil if you can
get we don't know the implications
decades down the line what happens when
you take de Charney amount of the ocean
I don't know we might figure that out in
a few decades right and then you have to
roll back and figure out something else
yeah Nancy's to any process right any
any energy generation process is gonna
have some kind of externalities you
either got
manufacturer in order to honest the
energy or you know you're burning some
kind of fuel or whatever right there's
always going to be some so it's about
minimizing them and where possible at
least producing waste products which can
be processed by nature right which are
not toxic to nature final waste products
which are yeah that then can be
reinstated into the ecosystem without
causing damage
absolutely and so now we can switch over
to our newer our newer topic we've been
on 50 minutes and we've already talking
about it what is our utopian our version
of the future of energy look like if we
were living in our individualistic
version of a perfect society for our
energy needs right what would you like
this to look like in 10 20 30 years our
energy on this planet I mean this this
is a little out there I don't know if
you obviously you're obviously a little
bit open to out there energy sources
right because your family's invested in
one which a lot of people could perceive
as being pretty out there right have you
heard of these toroidal fields these
electromagnetic toroidal fields you
create this field in the shape of torus
and it interacts with the Earth's
magnetic field and a magnet moving
within a magnetic field creates
electricity right and so these things
can supposedly I sort of film about this
a while ago but anyway supposedly these
film these things once creators produce
energy with no moving parts no burning
of fuel no emissions of any kind you
know I mean just just just just energy
right forever and ever and ever there's
nothing to wear out you know what I mean
there's no parts need replacing there's
not it's so it's essentially pulling
energy out of thin air essentially is
what it amounts to
so yeah listen I don't know whether this
thing is true or not I mean it was a
somewhat they they didn't go into a lot
of detail about it but anyway apparently
the guy that invented this thing was
he's you know his family was threatened
and he burned the plans and blah blah
blah blah blah this kind of thing so you
know it's a little bit of it I get that
a lot of people would would think this
is a very sort of yeah yeah Yaeger
conspiracy theory
nonsense and and it may well be there
I'm not I'm not trying to say it
definitely isn't that it may well be but
the point I'm trying to make is that our
reliance on fossil fuels
absolutely blinds us to the universe of
possibility that there must be out there
for the generation of energy right and
we don't even try we don't even look
very hard and one of the points this
film made was that you know the an
option presents itself we got aha and we
just go all-in on that thing right we're
again forget you know again focusing on
one target forgetting that there's a
whole bunch of other possibilities out
there that by focusing all that we are
now not able to explore the future was a
weird echo in my own but my feverish in
the future with energy is clearly we
have enough energy as individuals and as
a species that we are able to do all of
the things that we want to do grow
enough nutritious amazing food in cities
be able to create you know even things
that I don't necessarily care but other
people care about like creating a new
fashion piece every single day if that
is your within your values that isn't
going to cost the world the
externalities and energy is a huge piece
of that I imagine we are gonna come up
with I would like to see an open source
energy system or because you come up
with something you know it's it's going
to be put out in the world if it's
better than what we currently have and
anybody can innovate with it anybody can
find and find ways to improve it and
that's available about informations
available to everyone that having the
actual information on what the energy
does it costs us there is no such thing
as right now free energy so if you have
a solar panel what went into it if you
pop it down what went into it what does
the environmental cost what is the
social cost and to be able to have every
different community whether it's a tiny
community or you know a household or a
city to be able to assess what's going
to make the most sense for them to get
their energy to be able to get access to
the data to know are they meeting their
energy needs now and in the future and
be able to have a smart grid so that
when there's something that's faulty
with one person or one communities
hopefully insulated power source right
hopefully it's insulated strong word but
then it can exist off the grid but it's
connected to the grid so that if one
just like with food right you're growing
your own food but if you have a famine
you can rely on your surrounding
communities if you have a power source
go down then you have a surrounding
surrounding grid to be able to do and to
be able to look at alternative energy
sources and be able to assess is this
actually real right do we get energy out
of me one title is we get energy out of
these magnets when it's not attached to
the grid do we get other things that
aren't energy out of it right the
radiation what is how how efficient is
this and is it safe enough to try and on
what scale and if you're the person airy
person under current ma of course you're
it's not risky it's all about me and
profit and even you're gonna have
blinders on but if collectively we want
better and better energy for less
externalized cost we can work on that
together in a way that the for-profit
system can and so I think 1020 years in
the future we have efficient energy
sources because I think they already
exist and I think we just need a system
to get them out in the world and then
ways to actually improve if even if we
don't even if what we have is what was
in that movie right we have wind and
solar that's intermittent and it's never
gonna actually never gonna be but right
now and it looks like it's gonna take
decades and decades for it to get to
where we need it to be if it's open
source and anyone can innovate as long
as you're not mass producing solar
panels that aren't efficient I do think
we can innovate and get it to the point
you know like when you look at how much
computers first costs when they were
here right they were like city blocks
and millions and millions of dollars and
now my phone that keeps chiming at me
and this has more power than mine - I
think we're getting messages from the
Omega groups of us I think that's
exactly yeah I got to be I got a bit
sidetracked but I started talking about
that - Roy because what I was I was
actually trying to put it into the fight
and I got sidetracked into the context
of what is the perfect future look like
right and the perfect future
is free abundant energy where it's not
even a question right how efficient is
this and you know what a my energy needs
and blah blah blah blah blah but that
that is no longer even you know yes so
abundant it's like air you know what I
mean you just don't think about it there
are you know I mean that's supposedly
and I don't fully understand the physics
of this but supposedly in a cubic
centimeter of empty space there is an
infinite amount of energy right and so
you know you start tapping into you
start figuring out ways to tap into that
kind of there is just everywhere in
the universe all the time in infinite
abundance right and and and all of a
sudden energy becomes a zero
consideration so that's that's my ideal
future is it is it's just that we don't
even think about it anymore
you know for energy itself to figure out
the rest of it we self to figure out how
to get you know how to make a table
without having crap made it's not the
table right without having all of the
byproducts with anything we make but
energy is a huge part of it if we can
create energy without the massive
byproducts and we have clean energy that
is cheap because it's just plentifully
available I mean I know Tesla came up
with some kind of energy that's
everywhere and then of course Edison
micro microwaved electrocuted an
elephant to prove that it was unsafe
right and now we know it's like that
doesn't even exist
I see tapping into that that is free and
available everywhere yeah man I have no
doubt the universe is a mysterious place
right I mean I've known have no doubt
assuming we stay around long enough to
do so that we will tap into reserves of
energy that we at present we have no
idea they even exist you know what I
mean and we'll find this stuff I have no
doubt if we as I say if we can stay
around long enough to be able to do that
that's the great challenge right is can
we can we achieve abundance and wisdom
before we wipe ourselves out in
ignorance and and excessive power
without the wisdom to temperate that's
that's the great question yeah and I
think basically any scale we can
well it's just because the same things
keep coming up at all these solution
races right it's trust it's not an
information and it's like and so there
are a few things that we can solve
together that are actually going to be
powerful and if you want we can switch
over into the next sections it sounds
like almost there anyway of what could
we actually create now energies are hard
one because like what can you create
it's hard on small scales to do anything
impactful and significant with energy I
mean I think something wrong something
around the reduction in demand right on
the kind of scale we're talking about
ten thousand people a hundred thousand
dollars so it's it's it's it's about
resilience and it's about reduction in
demand and so figuring out ways I'm
trying to think of things that you could
collaborate your energy usage on you
know like for example water heating
could you have one central tank between
four houses which is large enough to
service all four has it but it's cheaper
to heat the one tank them to heat four
separate tanks in before now something
like that for example and I don't know
if that's technically feasible but but
but something like that some kind of
economy of scale that could be achieved
at relatively small scales right but
that would make a significant difference
yeah that's that's the sort of line I'm
going down I don't know I don't know
what you think but it seemed like
generation on any kind of scale is not
possible it is its generation of
anything is not really possible of that
kind of scale meaningful generation is
not possible with that part of scale it
seems to me what we're looking to do is
create energy on a massive scale for a
hundred thousand dollars that's not
gonna happen
for ten thousand people no we can't
generate electricity for ten thousand
people four hundred thousand dollars but
what we could do with ten thousand beep
$100,000 is map our current energy
consumption in that like I'm in
Vancouver I don't really have a choice
in how Vancouver creates their energy
but I also don't really know how Bank
uber great sir
like I know it's hydro I know that's a
hydro down but I don't actually know how
long has it been there when it's a
happier place how much energy is in what
wouldn't be better in Vancouver right
clearly we're not able to use solar here
but we might be able to use win we might
be able to use title what else is out
there having a system for ten thousand
people to say what's happening in my
city and what could be happening in my
city what is available out there right
what companies are worth more initiative
problem the councillor and making that
information as transparent as possible
you mean like commission commission
surveys that kind of thing use the use
the resources to Commission you know
what's a commission adjacent possible
type solutions right I figure out what
you could actually do within that not
actually do it because you know hundred
thousand dollars ten thousand he was not
enough to actually do it but figure out
what could be done yeah explore the
space is basically what you're saying
yeah and also if you start a new
community right if you're starting a
tiny you know one one family unit or
fifty family units what is available
that we could be off the grid right and
what's the most efficient what's the
most efficient solar panels even if
they're not ideal what is the most
efficient for what you're able to buy
and to be able to critique that
information right whether the company
whether the solar panel or whether the
entire technique in general like a dam
or like to be able to fully see the big
picture of energy then we can see things
like wait all nucular isn't bad right
what does that look like to actually see
why we mined uranium and what that looks
like versus this other these other
elements what could that look like when
somebody comes up with a new technology
if they're willing and transparent to be
like hey you you test it right like you
tell us whether it works off the grid
and like for ten thousand people could
come up with a critiquing system the
same does something work and is it safe
and even if they're not a governing body
we're enough we're if we're transparent
and the information is usable the most
people can understand it you can
actually see oh I can see this this map
of what look the alternative to nucular
looks like versus the current nuclear
versus a coal processing plant right you
can actually see the off foot
and see if you power a city on this
versus this if your coal processing
plant is going down and your government
is saying oh yes we're gonna create a
nuclear one is nuclear actually the best
option how do we compare all of the
health of all of the places particular
power right with all the places coal
processing power there's a lot of
information we can get with data and in
from end when it's available and usable
to the rest of the population it gives
us power in a way we don't currently
have it because right now we're you know
I mean two people talking of like hey do
I know if you do on catalyze Fusion is
real know even though I'm invested on
you know if this back you know magnets
are no we're just broadly speaking open
to the to the possibility that there's a
whole bunch of possibilities out there
you know what I mean yeah absolutely
um I mean it doesn't really fit in the
10,000 people hundred thousand dollars
but what he was saying before about
small communities again I'm pulling
numbers out of thin air this is not
based on knowledge or research kind of
thing but it seems to me that 30 40 50
households that kind of size you know
every house has a couple of panels on
the roof and every house has a little
it's just a little one little wind
turbine on the roof as well and
everybody's poop goes into a digester
which produces fertilizer and gas right
and you can store the gas and use that
to run a generator and you've got some
battery storage capacity azrael you know
having this diversification of power
generation right where you're not
reliant on any one of them but but the
combination of all of them gives you an
abundance of power right and you've got
the ability to store in the form of gas
and in the form of batteries right and
and and you know that and this is not I
mean the technology to do all of this is
is is easily available right now yeah
it's just it's just a question of
organization and then the strain on the
coal or the gas or the nuclear or
whatever it may be stations is way way
way which is because for the vast
majority of the time these things are
entirely self-sufficient and it's only
in times of exceptional demand or some
kind of catastrophe that befalls them
that there is the need for the grid
itself right and so you can you know you
can be sort of semi off-grid still
connects to the grid but producing the
majority of yourself
demand on the grid is minimal and
occasional sort of thing you see what I
mean and and that that kind of fractal
model right where at every level of
organization there is energy being
produced and there and thus there is
redundancy and resilience and slack
across the system at all kinds of scales
and I know this isn't in the $10,000 a
hundred thousand people but but there is
a role to be played at the smaller
scales is what I'm saying you know
they're happy and yeah for a couple of
thousand dollars you can put some solar
panels and a couple of batteries in your
home you know what I mean and and make
us be making a small contribution to
their overall resilience yeah which is
also even just knowing like how many
people in Vancouver have solar and what
are they getting out of that right like
how much is getting reput back into how
much are they reliant on the green
versus before and just having access
that data if people are able to give
access that data but having I don't even
know like a solutions contest um if
there were enough of us writing it and
word-of-mouth was enough for marketing
to be able to run a contest to say who
solved energy right who currently is
sitting on something that solves energy
and if they're willing to put that
information out there to say hey how
could we create a government a sorry a
lake a body to assess right to say yes
is it safe what goes into it how do we
know what goes into it right and and a
few hundred thousand people can create
that process of what would we trust
right how would we know that this is
this is actually a solution to our
problems it creates better cheaper
energy and there's less pollution and
environmental cost versus what we're
sold right but of course it's it's solar
panel it's environmentally friendly
actually like it's the word like
collecting solutions that exist and then
assessing them and then looking for the
holes of well if we had you know the
energy from this one and this from this
one and we were able to create something
from the ground like having the ability
to win somebody has an idea bring it to
market but right whenever you're
starting there's already tons of ideas
out there right someone who came up with
it the 70s in the 80s and the 90s anyone
sitting on anything what
what is it and what was it like how can
we use it and make it better right is it
available to be bought right now because
then if there were solar panels that are
available in the market right now which
one's actually the best and then we can
bulk buy them and then yes it's you're
paying $10 to get information to the
data not we always makes me laugh have
you always basically come back to this
right what we need is a way of
organizing information in an effective
way so we have access certainty to make
good decisions and their marketplace
yeah yeah I mean you were gonna you said
a while ago that you were gonna start
putting these solution raisings together
in sort of sort of bigger was that these
these yeah and that is that is the the
two overriding mess of themes that I've
taken from the ones that I've been and
I've been involved in quite a few of
them is that the construction of
platforms that allow access to and
contribution to and Trust in information
right and secondly transparency up and
down in every direction right complete
transparency in how things are done how
decisions will arrive there how
resources are allocated bla bla bla bla
bla and yeah and I and I absolutely
agree with that I'm just saying that
those are the obvious mess of themes
that have come through again and again
and again and again and again every
single context right those come through
as as the important things so yeah I
mean that's that seems to me to be I
mean I that could also be because it's
usually just the same small group of
people right and so there's maybe just a
reflection of that we all think maybe
you could make this argument as well
right so yeah I mean I guess until it
goes out to a wider audience and the
same kind of conversations ahead and see
if they come up with the same with you
know those themes also come up again and
again and again in a wider audience that
would be yeah that would be really
interesting to find out wouldn't it is
it's such a shame that this hasn't over
the time I it's great that you keep
plugging away at it it really is it's
just such a shame and I have to I have
been also you know some of which you're
aware of some of which or not I have
been trying to tell other people into it
and yeah they either come for
then we don't see him again or they
don't come at all the audience I
completely get there I'm just saying
it's a shame in terms of what you're
doing not in terms of you're not getting
popularity and kudos I don't mean that
in terms that is the thing itself is
just not drawing more people in it's a
real shame yeah I mean I do think that
if people knew this was going on and
that they could participate in it
there's a percentage of the populations
interested in that right and let's say
it's 1% of the population that's
interested in creating solutions and
having conversations to actually create
solutions then like you know I mean you
need to get to 500 people to find five
and it's that's always kind of one of
the other meta things is marketing right
if you have a solution for someone how
do you get the message to the people who
it's a solution for without the lies
right without testing it is it is like
if you know and then there's also like
if one celebrity finds it one celebrity
tweets it one then like they're bringing
their prestige to it and then anything
can go viral basically overnight it's
that this isn't designed to go viral in
the way that game a is it's designed to
bring people into the conversation and
that's so right now I am looking at the
old solution racing's and figuring out
what is the best solution we came up
with during them right what is a
solution we came up with them to say hey
what if we have this hole what if we
have a basic transportation solution
that's feasible like a top five or
whatever like these are the best things
that we came up with rather than looking
at the okay okay I mean you could do
both I guess you could do well the idea
is personally because you know I love
going metal whatever I possibly can
right but for me that the interesting
thing is looking at all of them and
seeing what what were the commonalities
right email you talking about different
domains
what were the commonalities across
domains that that's what I would find
interesting yeah so it's it's balance
for each different sector imagine we had
this little thing with education and
this little thing with health care and
transportation and food
it's not we're feeding everyone in the
world but like hey we have an app that
helps you garden and coordinate with
your neighbors right wouldn't that be
cool here's what we could do with that
now imagine we had a world with all of
them right imagine we have this
education this one this one
none of them are unfeasible right none
of them are taking down your government
and starting from scratch and it's like
well we could actually do together and
then from that also there are some very
obvious meta solutions that run through
all of them right which was what you
were talking about these the marketing
platform a way to get information part
of the issue is some of them are much
more financially lucrative right if you
have something where you're collecting
money and you're keeping a percentage of
it and that can fund a ton of other
stuff but if we're starting with
something that we don't naturally fund
like an information system right we
don't pay for Wikipedia then you need to
find 10,000 people who are the goodness
of their heart want to create this for
the goodness of humanity who exists but
it's finding them amongst the population
whereas if we're creating one that is
very if we're creating one that is
universally needed and generates
finances then it you know I mean it self
self funding itself people will seen
this alright let's do that I decide you
want to put what Matt said up here yeah
check out their red grid I don't know
this this project but I would be
interested in talking to the person who
is and ya know there's a lot of stuff
cool stuff happening with all the chain
and Dow stack and it's definitely part
of it I'm guessing this is the
percentage of people you think is I
think it's much higher than that and I
think we can see that in the world right
now that there are people people looking
to create a better world together and I
think it's not much there's a tiny
fraction the population who it's like
their biggest mission and they will
sacrifice and do but most of us care
enough that like if it was 5% extra
money to not use child slave labor and
we knew that they would like we're gonna
choose the one without it I think most
of us do you care it's how hard is it to
care how arduous is it to care and then
dealing with that and then sounds like a
tax it's not a tax any more than Netflix
as a tax
look it's like that you're choosing to
put in X amount of money you're choosing
to
to give money to the you know Red Cross
it's not attacks it's a donation it's
somewhere in between a membership fee
and a donation right that you're
choosing to be part of this you choosing
to co-create a solution together we're
not actually collecting ten dollars from
each of the 10,000 people we don't have
the 10,000 people
but right now what I'm looking to do
Eric so I've been going live at 8:30 in
the morning every morning and it's not
so working for me as an individual so
what I'm gonna do next week I'm taking
off just that from the week except for
we'll do a solution raising and then the
week after I want to have four different
conversations that I want to participate
in at the same time but on different
days so the solution raising will be one
of them one of the other ones what are
the other two three one is a process
raising what is actually finding a group
of people who want to continually talk
have a conversation about what could it
look like to create something with
10,000 people right so it's actually
raising a process that to find and work
with 10,000 people to create a solution
and then implement it right we're not
going to start with 10,000 but we're and
that's the goal so starting with a
hundred people how could we work through
a solution to actually create something
right and then with those hundred we can
find yeah finding the hundreds are bit I
think one see once you've got a hundred
I think the 10,000 getting to 10,000
from 100 it's probably easier than
getting from zero to a hundred I reckon
absolutely yeah but it's getting people
together getting a handful of people who
want to have that conversation both how
do we grow it but also what do we do if
we grow it right if there were 10,000
people right now how do we work through
a solution very significant besides
give us your $10 and we'll create it and
even then I wonder how about this how
about using the same notion but wrong
but fractal izing it right and so first
of all you have a process raising for
how do we get ten people together and
then when you've got ten then you have a
process raised but how do we get the
hundreds together and then you have the
process raising four right what do we do
when we've got 10,000 and how do we get
the 10,000 you know with an amazing idea
for 10,000 and we don't need to fractal
it right but but chances are 10 people
are gonna need to come up with a
solution for a hundred we're gonna need
to composition 4,000 or gonna need to
come up with
so it is my guess it's capitalism is
just said capitalism I don't mind that I
quite like that the synthesis right the
yen that's very very little to do where
I mean it exists it has to come through
capitalism because capitalism is the
permeating current world view so
anything that comes out of the current
world has to come out of this this
existing marketplace and it's a way to
create a better world together without
needing an entire system breakdown right
like any of these things are feasible
with ten thousand people and a hundred
thousand dollars and ten thousand people
although it's hard for me to get them
it's not actually that hardest there was
ten thousand people basically overnight
for half the köppen 19 every Co mid
nineteen group right and if vehicle mid
nineteen Vancouver information in Kovac
nineteen Seattle information so you're
gonna engineer a virus to people knowing
right and like once this is over gearing
some of those people towards hey now
that you've figured out the world's a
little broken would you like to come
help solve it right and what level
people want to solve it at the beginning
people the ten people are gonna be
people were very committed to to this
world ten thousand hopefully aren't
necessarily people who are super
committed it's people who want to put in
ten dollars to see this industry get
better right like their health care get
better their food yet better not necess
it's never gonna get to utopia despite
the fact we spend that time talking
about our version of utopia right we'd
have to if what we first have to do is
agree on our version of utopia which is
what most game be is kind of dealing
with actually right like without ever
actually it's like no what can we do now
without some people 100 thousand dollars
and then my boys can't even did you
upset no no not yet I only just saw that
the link I'll watch it before yeah yeah
yeah and he just put it up five minutes
before I posted that link I was just so
happened to Heather a message with just
that time oh yeah let me put that out
there I go boys Kings to you guys think
cooking Batsuit well the funniest part
of that would be me and being cooking on
a scope
at all I would totally heat down with
trying basically most animals if I'm
gonna eat pig who I not eat that I mean
really think I came hearing my kid on
messenger next room I do think there are
some things we could do with energy and
ten thousand ten thousand people a
hundred thousand dollars which is just
even just putting out all of the green
energy that happy to here's what we
could do with 10,000 people hundred
thousand dollars actually assets the
green New Deal not have AOL and Bernie
assess it and not you already mean like
actually and even non Americans right
like is this actually a viable economic
option and environmental option what is
that look like I don't know how you so
in order to mean but like having an
outside force to say this isn't an
environmental it's like we care about
the planet but we're not here to lie
about the numbers to get you on board to
our mental plan we're here to have a
planet in fifty years our best course of
action I mean the the I mean green
energy is we currently understand it
which is wind solar tidal although
that's massively under exploited wave
same hydroelectric nuclear bajo mass
although it's laughable raipur biomass
like we're just biomass or boosters why
are we this is what I mean at a
community level is genuinely a
decent producer of burnable gas right
and the producers of variety of
hydrocarbons which can be burned and
army knows but there are things honestly
I mean I've seen these things I've seen
these things on YouTube where you know
everybody's proof goes into this big
thing and it gets whirled around in a
centrifuge or something like that and
all the water is pushed out of it and
then the solid stuff sits in a tray for
a little while and it breaks down with
bacteria it becomes doesn't smell of poo
at all anymore right it's just nice
compost right and the gas that comes off
it while it's digesting goes through
tubes and is collected in a tank and you
know it's a beautiful thing you get
fertilizer you process all your poop you
get
which you can burning it generates I
mean it's it's a beautiful thing this is
exactly how communities should be
designed right when when when housing
estates are built when a new area you
flatten the ground and the bulldozers
come in and they build up hundred new
houses they should you know all the new
projects there's no reason in the world
it wouldn't wouldn't cost a great deal
more if it's done at the time of
construction right and to build all this
crap in there would be no problem at all
section I was like I guarantee you
someone's literally has a like
all-in-one unit for a like community of
50 but but what is the I like how do you
sell that to people right like everyone
shits in there some energy in your house
has normally you don't have to go out to
the thing to and it just runs from
the toilet into it has an issue we don't
really don't interact with the audience
because the point is to have a
conversation but since there's only two
of us and Eric talked Eric can I talk
how many times a week it's gonna mention
like oh no that's not that wasn't the
one swing bird equals carbon dioxide and
carbon dioxide isn't bad the carbon to
me thinks you're turning the methane
into carbon dioxide right which is a far
far far weaker guess I mean which would
be coming off our poo anyway right at
least which energy from it so ya know it
is it's it's entirely green actually I
understand the Oscar the question you're
asking but it is actually entirely green
we're turning methane into carbon
dioxide which is good and yeah the
methane would be coming off anyway it's
not like we're creating the methane we
breathe it out you poop it out we do all
of these things but it's collecting it
and figuring out what to do with that
like if we live in balance with our
ecosystem we breathe that out trees free
that in it works out beautifully it's
working we're never gonna get to the
point where we produce zero carbon
dioxide unless we also breathing it it's
producing it within the balance of the
ecosystem there's enough trees to
breathe it in that we're not
pumpkin and out there but we're already
 and then we're flushing it down
the toilet so that it has to be cleaned
out or just put into the ocean and it's
just bad as opposed to as far as I know
we can't stop so we bought
Isabella using Nesta comes off it
absolutely absolutely absolutely so yeah
I mean these these kinds of things were
only minimally explored and like I said
the solutions and the technology to do
this stuff is is and has been around for
you know a good deal of time nothing new
nothing fancy pretty easy actually
energy is not zero green energy is
better emission than what it was before
like well I mean the example that we've
just been talking about using the
methane that comes off of poo and you
and burning that to produce energy this
is actually less than zero emission
right because you're taking in terms of
greenhouse I'm talking yeah but it's
actually less than zero emission because
you are converting methane which is a
very very powerful greenhouse gas into
carbon dioxide which is a relatively
weak greenhouse gas right and deriving
energy in the process and that's not
having to burn fossil fuels to get their
energy which is turning captured carbon
yeah into carbon dioxide sighs a whole
different equation I'm afraid of sort of
missing it yeah
greenhouse gases but we're emitting
those greenhouse gases anyway and the
amount that we're emitting is going down
if we're climbing is becoming less
exactly right it's next its net less
than zero not just net zero net less
than zero no I I would I am mrs. M I got
not the science but the reason why it's
not for survival is that uses more
energy that produces it literally can't
like if this isn't solar energy stored
in it this is this is how do we use our
 we're out anyway in a
system where it's using the gases off of
it if that system that you input uses
more energy than it's ever going to
produce and yes but that's it's next the
only thing that consumes energy is the
centrifuge right to get the water air
and that just runs through two seconds
as the people but it's also
the embodied energy in all the equipment
though right like fun no fair enough
yeah yeah fair enough no that's a valid
point yeah I don't I don't know that
equation
I don't but as to the best of my
knowledge because it's passive equipment
you know very very few moving parts and
and nothing to degrade it lasts
essentially forever as far as I know
yeah yeah yeah yeah it's a fair enough
question to which I don't really know
the answer so I'm not going to speculate
I think this is this is so not okay I
don't even know what to say well because
no we do you know how to stop
shitty no sorry that's really not the
same thing is that so that doesn't make
sense those trees are eating our carbon
dioxide giving us oxygen and cutting
them down and burning them is not
efficient it's just economically
efficient if you get yeah anyway your
shitty shitty so what do you feel like
why not use something with it unless
we're gonna stop that right if at any
point this becomes okay everyone we're
gonna need to upper this week
because we don't have enough energy then
yes that would be highly inefficient but
since we're gonna eat and do this anyway
and it feeds back in any system becomes
manure as well right when it's safe
enough when there isn't the stuff that
the pathogens getting passed on from
humans human it becomes our food source
as well right now it's just a toxin and
a byproduct that word that costs us a
lot as opposed to giving us back
anything and there's a bunch of fee but
like nature's a feedback system so the
fact that you can have fish right like
you can have fish per dick that you're
producing that are feeding the
plants you're also eating the fish or
also you're the fish that's it like it's
something we're we're also part of the
ecosystem we also we also die we
also here right so like we're byproducts
as well and so why not why not use our
 if it can be done safely if it then
becomes its own industry or we're trying
to produce we have you know
factories for like force-feeding humans
to make them so we can use their
fuel it's not like
he made bad but just collecting it using
it is not the problem
I just cook I just I just had took
delivery of 12 big bags of today
and paid money for it right is good
you know especially after him renew
marae ters their grass eating animals is
an absolutely essential part of the
process so it might at the moment I mean
it does get used to a certain extent I
mean oh yeah I don't know how it works
in Canada but in in the UK the water
purification plants they spread the
thinly over it and then they scraped it
up and they put it in bags and they send
it off to farms to use as fertilizer so
it does get used but it could be used
for that and in getting energy from it
right and and and all of that one thing
that could be yes so decomposing
vegetables and stuff too right again if
we're producing if I'm like well I'm
gonna put this in so we can get energy
versus I'm not gonna make this into soup
I'm not gonna use this in any way but
it's decomposing because that's what
organic matter does why not collect the
gases off of it as it's decomposing it's
gonna give off the methane and carbon
dioxide anyway why not collect it and
then burning it like we just have to
work with chemistry and physics
we can't reinvent chemistry and physics
like we just methane is a molecule co2
is a molecule and it has certain
implications moving from one to the
other and we just have yes we have to
work with chemistry and physics I don't
know it and having access that
information of here's what methane looks
like here's at co2 here's how we make it
into co2 and then what we do with it and
having that be transparent right because
it is transparent
I mean methane is not changing how it
how it lives its life how it goes
through a chemical reaction based on
profits but to have for the individual
consumer to have access to that
information means we can make better
choices and we can innovate better when
someone comes up with the new innovation
to be like who there is a broken piece
of that and fixes it
emanate release that into the world the
world's who are likely to accept it
because they have the fundamental
knowledge to understand it and to see if
it's better or worse than what it
currently exists and what we need to
roll it out to more places right
so what do you think is our most viable
option we could do to improve either our
individual energy choices you're already
doing fine over there
but our individual energy choices or
have more of an impact on our planetary
energy sources but 10,000 people and
100,000 dollars I mean it seems to me
that again at that sort of level of
resolution you know so this relatively
small scale is what we're talking about
it seems to me that the most effective
Avenue to explore is that of reducing
impacts so economies of scale as I said
before and changing behaviors wherever
possible right instead so instead of
going to the supermarket I don't know
every three days go once every two weeks
that kind of thing and and and buying as
much as you possibly can from people who
produce it locally because that is using
a huge amount less energy and the
transportation of the stuff you know
what I mean you know being aware of the
content is not just about how much you
drive your car and how long you leave
your lights on at home and and you know
in changing to low wattage lightbulbs
and stuff like that it's not it's about
everything that you buy what's the
supply chain what's the what's the
energy demand in the production of that
good you know what I mean are you
there's a million things and so it seems
to me that organize it as again coming
back to what you were saying having
information organized in such a way that
it was possible to see it easily and be
able to make such choices that would be
that would have it that would have an
immediate and significant impact on
energy demand and the less you go the
less you need the less you burn right
and it's as simple as that mm-hmm yeah
no we didn't actually focus during the
solutions but well you were talking
having a way to understand what it is
I'm making choices on a daily basis and
what that impact is and then offering me
suggestions to have less of an impact in
a positive way right where it is hey by
the way you ain't grocery shopping every
day this week
instead how about you go on Wednesdays
and here's your shopping list right
here's what why you left the other days
right like to actually give you the
information not make you feel bad about
it not just like there's a way you could
reduce your your impact right and
offering hey if you switched over to
this crane instead of this one you'd
have less of an impact well I can't my
kids allergic to that one okay yeah it's
not about everyone else - it's about why
are you making the choices you make and
what I know right do I know whether
brown rice or white rice that's more of
an environmental impact I do not and I
don't know what the difference is
imagine white rice has more environments
Lembeck in this process but I don't know
if that's true
having yeah access to the information
the choices that I do make on what the
impact is so I can make better choices
and making it be more feasible but like
hey you and your neighbor both went to
go get a carton of milk on Monday did
you know if you coordinated you could
have be all gone to corner you know you
can appoint one single and creating any
kind of system for data would be the
most um advantageous I believe I may be
employing more child labor right because
child labor is free and yeah yes turn
out get some exercise get some work
experience so maybe it may be a little
bit more enforced child labor
oh yeah solution raising child labor
under utilizing that resource I've been
watching it's over now so I'm there's no
more to watch but this show a BBC called
the mill and it's from like the 1800s
when there was the cotton gin E and then
the looms and people working there and
they're fighting for children to only
have 12-hour days like only up ten hour
days and it's this weird cuz this farmer
who's going through this this famine out
in Scotland Ireland you know comes to
England and he's on a side of life that
the factory owners and he he lies that
his little boy is nine or how old you
have to be to work there and there was
this it was because people living in
London who have no choice but to send
their kids to work at these factories
want their kids to have less time to
factory but he's coming from a farm
where honestly you work with your kids
right your kids are learning they're out
there all day every day like there's
different scales a factory of child
labor right there's living as a family
learning from your family and your
family's there to protect you and it's
not ideal but you know what I mean like
you're learning the skills of your
family versus somebody else taking a
labour of your kid paying you or paying
somebody a tiny amount they'll break
your kid they won't care and not
different and and although this is 1800
Britain right and showing that what we
fought for and how we won these labor
rights these things still exist all over
the world there's you know kids who are
on who are in cocoa plantations they're
not with their families they're sold
into slavery and then you don't mean you
have this person looking after them and
it's no amount of they don't care just
break them and get new one right but in
it's your kid like there's that
difference between do we want an adult
to be able to say yes my kid can work
for us it's not but yeah if the
difference is my kids starving or
working I choose working right and that
that level of and we're not using child
labor but that that um that all child
labor is bad there was just that moment
in the middle where I was like this is
why this guy is fighting for it is he
came from a farm and it's very different
to me a four minute of factory that your
kids working at versus your kid working
we're going on in your site and there's
someone else being the foreman and
beating them and eating them to be in a
certain level of you know energy and hey
why not so it's just interesting we have
another solution raising on Thursday
this week at 11:00 a.m. so an hour and a
half from now but on Thursday on game B
mapping that's all right it's tomorrow
yeah 11:00 a.m. on game B mapping if you
want to want to attend I can send you
the link mateus is gonna be there I'm
gonna be there and I don't know who else
will be there but so an hour and a half
from now yeah I'm not sure I make last
of another call I'll see I'm not sure on
the other calls my beer but yeah
send me the link anyway just I mean I
think I'm gonna post it and BB itself
today but then it's like I want this
sweet spot of like the
five people involved in not seven if I
knew ahead of time you want to zoom but
it always ends up like the moment of
there's too many whatever it's a good
problem to have and yeah figuring and
then I'm looking to create a showing me
one day a week where we're holding these
the solution raisins I think they are
the thing they showcase that what is
possible we have a small group of people
and what collectively is a lot of amount
money but individually it's not a lot of
money and that but what I'm looking for
is people who want to meet weekly to do
the process raising to talk about how do
we get time people or how do we get
10,000 people and just continue that
conversation every week of what when is
the most impactful project how what do
we move forward with it how what would
that look like
right cuz we don't have 10,000 peoples
everything's risky yeah on something and
then get 10 people and then get a
hundred people and and yeah I mean much
as I enjoy these conversations at some
point they have to actually actually
trying to get that first core of 10
committed individuals together behind
one thing whatever it might be I don't
even care what it is I'm much more
interested in the process rather than
the thing itself I don't really care
what the thing is that's any of the
process and then I'm gonna do one
dedication to the five questions so
similarly to what we've been doing with
the idea Cafe showing up and just
answering the five questions over the
course of six to eight weeks hopefully
to create something like our maker group
right where it's like we feel more
connected but I'm hoping that people
don't want to just participate that on
camera they want Chris tape on that off
of camera Nick inspires other people to
create those right that they create
groups to explore the five questions
because I'm finding it useful for myself
to explore the five questions but also
to explore them with a group right to
hear other people's answers to them and
then the fourth conversation I'm looking
to have every week is I don't know quite
know what it looks like but it's just a
conversation I enjoy which is like the
power of technology and how technology
itself can help us but also with game be
in it right like I don't want Google and
Facebook owning the technology I don't
want our governments doing this
technology so picking like four or five
topics every four to five weeks right
saying hey for the next four weeks here
are the topics in the next four weeks
here are the topics but how
us generate them together so people who
care about that people who there's
enough people in game B who want to have
I hope who wanna have a conversation
about the power of technology doubt
staff and homeland chain not caring
about what the technology is under the
umbrella of just what can humanity do
with technology with trust and you know
ethics hopefully interwoven in it so
that is that is what I'm up to at the
moment we're gonna be doing this next
week I don't know what it what solution
racing would you like to do next week so
the solution tonight I don't have one
plans I don't I had like packaging in
the meta want one of the ones that I
didn't do because Bentley when we first
started doing solution rate since I
asked April and Bentley and they both
have reason um recent making stuff a
word sense making as their reason for
their project and so doing sense making
in like the news or politics right like
we actually haven't touched news and
politics of like how do we stay informed
do we do with media currently and then
with 10,000 people hundred thousand
dollars and also knew like the news
media the media entertainment media are
kind of two separate ones right how do
we stay informed and then how do we get
entertained and how could we make that
more powerful but that's less I'm more
interest in the news I feel that that to
me feels very individual you know I mean
I had you stay informed well you know
that's up to you how do you want to stay
informed you know there's a whole
plethora of stuff out there yeah
discussions I'm always gonna have pops
up as as the discussion goes on right so
I'm always there thanks Ted so you buddy
youtube her scope hi guys thanks for
hanging out
I mean comments even though I didn't
interact with them too much