regulating the regulatory capacity of
complex systems complex systems have a
bunch of different regulatory dynamics
that interact with each other in ways
that we only understand a little bit and
so and different kinds of complex
systems have different kinds
brigadefuhrer dynamics and we have to
get clear which ones are going to be the
right models for economics for
civilization as a whole for governance
for infrastructure so specifically we
have complex adaptive systems that don't
have clear boundaries and don't have any
centralized ability of information so a
forest is an example right or any kind
of an ecosystem is an example where that
whole thing can't behave as one
autonomous unit in any kind of real-time
capacity there might be coordination of
things like my silikal networks that
will share resources but this is a very
slow kind of response curve and so there
are dynamics of how that is a complex
adaptive system but it doesn't actually
have singular agency right and that's
defined by a lack of memory lack of
self-organizing membrane that separates
the complex system from everything else
that allows agency of what's on the
inside of the membrane in relationship
to the environment outside we see then
you know the earliest membranes are
prokaryotes and they have the capacity
to navigate with agency and relationship
to the environment then as we start to
get into eukaryotes and slime molds we
get into something we have multiple
steps of boundaries these are you can
think of these as super organisms
comprised of simple organisms and so
here you have to get the agency of
different things to participate with a
high coherence which is already
happening in the forest but participate
with a different kind of high coherence
where they don't have competitive
dynamics with each other they have
coherent dynamics with each other and
may be competitive dynamics outside of
that boundary and then you get a new
boundary outside of it right which is
the biofilm around the slime mold and
then that whole thing starts to operate
as a unified organism even though it's a
super organism of my growth smaller
organisms that's a totally different
kind of behavior than just the
individual organism because the
individual organism doesn't have to take
agents and
coherence between them right whereas the
superorganism that like a forest that is
not yet a secondary organism it doesn't
also have to create certain kinds of
coherence it just has to create
homeostasis predation cycles of balance
but then the next one where you get you
know a slime mold boundary or a
eukaryote that is made of kind of
prokaryotic like dynamics now you have
to get separate agents to cohere and
then become a new meta agent right then
that starts to evolve in eukaryotic
systems to greater complexity and as
soon as we had a neural net we start to
get a different kind of way of
centralizing information across this
kind of complex that allows a lot more
adaptive capacity than the slime mold
has the slime mold is only going to do
chemical signaling which is going to go
very slowly and the you know something
that has a neural net it's going to be
able to actually eliminate either of
lots of organisms from a top-down
fashion so you can actually start to
have a boundary anytime you have a
boundary you start to get some and
top-down coordination but then you have
phases of what kinds of top-down so then
you go from distributed neural Nets a
central nervous system then higher kinds
of central nervous system and so
top-down organization is actually an
emergent property of certain kinds of
bottom-up organization right you get
bottom-up organization of separate cells
coming together to make up a human right
hundred trillion autonomous agents that
function more coherent linked together
and adaptive for them to be together
then separately and each cell is
regulating its own function genetically
and eternally in a bottom-up fashion but
then the top-down neuro endocrine
control of massive groups of cells where
the top-down system is sensing the
entire system and then can do
coordination of the whole system but
sitting on top of bottom-up dynamics
which is if the cells weren't still
doing their own thing genetically the
top-down system wouldn't work at all but
if the top-down system is not working
well like a person's in a coma and the
higher the highest functions are turned
off and only autonomic is on the
bottom-up is working just as well but it
doesn't have the same capacities at all
you have emergent capacities that relate
to
greed and top-down capability which of
these are models for what civilization
will be right is it going to be
individual humans that are just like a
forest that don't have any kind of
boundary around it and we just get that
once through getting the right kind of
predation cycles and equilibriums is it
humans as a slime mold that are working
together but without central top-down
control that a nervous system give or is
it what kind of level of nervous system
that has centralized above capacity and
at the level of human nervous system
forecasting ability right rather an
abstraction from giving forecasting
ability it's a super deep question
because also our human consciousness and
you human sense of self is the emergent
property of the coordination of all of
these things working together but if all
those things are working together but
without certain kinds of synergistic
dynamics you don't get human
consciousness ie a person in a coma you
don't have the same thing so is humanity
gonna become a super organism that
actually has its own agency right and
we're building that kind of nervous
system of humanity or is humanity a
boundary list non-agent we're at least
getting the kind of coherence between
agents that keeps it from
self-destructing those are those are
fundamentally different kinds of complex
adaptive systems there are different
relationships of their different
mariology right we have a different
relationship between the parts and the
other parts and the parts in the whole
and and then totally different forecasts
of what kind of capacities are going to
come about so if we simply do the you
know the libertarian models totally
bottom-up right how do we get people to
be individually good choice makers and
good at making deals with each other
that are effective and no top-down
structure all of the anarchy models
basically are those kinds of models but
as soon as we have complex decisions to
make complex choices to make that
involve lots of us and data capacities
the individual humans can't do which we
have lots of that if we don't address we
go extinct and the questions
that has to sit on top of the good
libertarian like framework of individual
people making good choices so that's
necessary but it's not sufficient right
there are things that will have to be
decided on by large groups of people and
participated in faster then would happen
through bottom-up only dynamics so now
this is the next topic which is our
ability to affect things and our ability
to make good decisions regarding how we
affect things have to be paired
otherwise if we can affect things but
we're not making good choices regarding
how we affect things and the
externalities that start compiling
become problematic as our ability to
affect things is on an exponential curve
right now if our choice making capacity
is not similarly on an exponential curve
that is a fundamentally self terminating
scenario so exponential tech this is the
third scenario brother exponential tech
gives individual agents and small groups
of agents capacities that never happen
before so when you think about like you
think about Nash equilibriums and
wanting to get us out of up Nash
equilibriums you don't need everybody to
do the right thing because individual
agents all have quasi equal power and
the worst thing and together which will
be really up everybody has a
certain critical mass that people have
to do the wrong thing in a dynamic where
you have exponential tech that is
powerful enough to be catastrophic
that can be decentralized everybody's
choice making matters so how do we do
what that is a totally different thing
right and so for Humanity to make it
through us individually and in small
groups scaling our actuator capacity up
exponentially our choice making capacity
regarding what we do with that actuator
fasi and our feedback loops on that also
have to scale up now whenever we develop
new technology in the past we did heaps
of destructive applications but the
technology wasn't so bad that it
destroyed everything we burned a lot of
 down on the fire before we kind of
learned how to manage fire to be more
positive than negative but you can't do
that with nukes
right and you can't do it with CRISPR
because it's not the impact potential is
radically more than it was the fire and
so
how do we take our new emerging
technologies and do something with them
that is radically different than we've
ever done with any technologies in the
past which is adequate anticipatory
process so that we don't learn from
trial and error on things that are too
powerful to learn from trial and error
that's a totally different set of
scenarios that we have to address so
then we get into the issue of incentive
mm-hmm
one of the things is that we have to you
can't avoid a problem while you've
incentivize it
you also can't solve a problem while
you're continuing to incentivize at that
scale one of the problems with
exponential tech and why we are not
doing a good enough job of thinking
through the problems of exponential text
slowly is because there's a lot of
fiscal incentive to get there first and
there's not that much fiscal incentive
to really think through the issues you
know in a long slow doing thoughtful way
and so spending where you were
sterilizing excellence we are to be
really thinking about it we are we are
increasing the probability of extinction
for the probability of winning in the in
the near term profit game that will be
obsoleted in the process but each of
those increase in the probability of
extinction compound on all the other
ones till the probability reaches one
right and it's it at the current
trajectory is inexorably reaching one a
hundred percent probability of
extinction and so you've changed that
whole thing so you can't have an
economic system that incentivizes speed
on things that have to go slowly right
that's a that's a just I can't
underscore that one enough but then that
also brings up the issue of incentive in
general with complex systems is how do
you get a bunch of individual cells or
algae or whatever to work together into
a super organism rather than compete
with each other well you have to change
the behavioral dynamics from competitive
to cooperative you you have to change
all the things that affect behavioral in
them so incentive is one of the major
categories of behavior of dynamic as
long as we have any systems of incentive
and then we'll go larger past incentive
so kind of diving into systems of
incentive more mmm-hmm if as there are
more humans than there have ever been
and exponentially more and the impact
per capita capacity of the humans is
also been on an exponential curve and
it's an exponential curve point that is
reaching escape velocity you know we can
kind of metaphorically say we are
achieving the power of gods over the
next little while without the wisdom
discernments care of gods that is a
inexorably self extinct ting scenario so
how do we deal with that youyou kind of
can't put the technological curve cat's
back in the back that's an impossible
thing to do outside of just mmm
fail scenarios on what we call
civilization right now so you have to
come up with adaptive capacities in
factoring for that level of technology
and so if you think about as we have
that much capacity to affect stuff and
there's that many of us affecting stuff
that means ability for humans to affect
other humans and the ability for humans
to affect the ecosystem and all of the
cascade effects of both of those are
radically increased now the total you
know humans affecting the ecosystem is
right near breaking points of the
biosphere losing key life support
capacity and even before it loses life
support capacity overarching like ie
there's no viable places to live you
start losing certain viable places to
live as soon as you start losing certain
viable places so climate change causing
severe droughts where farmers have to
move out of those areas into cities
which is what happened in Syria lowland
areas flooding etc then you start to
deal with massive migrations refugee
issues and then resource Wars and then
fragile grids collapsing and so we're
not just looking at ecosystem scenarios
just in terms of the ecosystem by itself
but ecosystem scenarios and culture
issues war issues resource issues
fragile grid issues any of those they're
all interconnected nothing there's
enough fragility across those
that failure in any of the systems can
lead to catastrophic test AIDS currently
so as we have that level of capacity to
affect things the coherence of everyone
affecting things in neutral to positive
ways is critical right it is
existentially necessary so how do we get
that much coherence what we have to get
coherence amongst the behavioral
dynamics right so that people are
behaving in ways that net benefit the
balance sheet of the Commons and in each
other so let's just talk about the
center for a moment like we said you
cannot incentivize a problem and prevent
that problem from happening
simultaneously and just it's really
important to get you cannot legislate
against incentives successfully long
term ever if you make a piece of law
that says it's illegal to do this but
it's still profitable to do this the
companies can always move headquarters
to another country and then pay taxes
there which actually makes a market for
countries to make law that's more
favorable to shitty things right
whatever that incentive is and yet so
the companies really are not under the
full jurisdiction countries and yet
countries the people who need election
budgets and the people who need campaign
budgets are under the jurisdiction of
whoever can fund those things and so
economics as an incentive system you
can't
you've ultimately can't confer resource
an advantage to certain kinds of
behavior and prevent those behavior
through agreement fields that are still
subject to the resources you know the
pools of accrued resources and so it's
important to get that because any
strategy says we're going to solve
climate change through primarily
regulation we're gonna solve war
whatever through regulation wow the
incentives are misaligned has never and
will never lastingly work you can get
temporary blips that's about it and so
you know what that looks like is if we
want a world without war we can't have
any incentive for war and we have to
have incentive for collaboration
cooperation cetera so where is their
incentive for war let's start with the
obvious you can't have the largest bloc
of global economy be a
military-industrial
flex that stops existing without war and
have war stop existing and have it
continue right so its own continuance
requires a reason for its existence so
any model of lasting peace and
reconciliation that obsoletes
militarized conflict has to obsolete a
for-profit military-industrial complex
or it has no chance of succeeding so any
strategies that aren't trying to do that
have no chance of succeeding that's a
big deal because so far everything that
has tried to do peace American salvation
hasn't been focused on that at all which
means that none of those things that are
had any chance of succeeding now then we
can also look at as long as you have
separate balance sheets that have
interest on ownership that encourages
hoarding and competition in a zero-sum
finite game dynamic then just resource
ownership encourages war right because
it ends up being we're fighting over
things and fighting always in you know
in a force dynamic at the end of the day
and so can you have freedom from war as
long as we have zero-sum game dynamics
No
so this is you know not only do you not
do you have to give it up a for-profit
military-industrial complex you have to
get rid of zero-sum games period because
as long as you have zero-sum games
we're losing at the game ends up meaning
can't support the people of your country
adequately means losing the adaptive
competitive power means all that then it
is a survival to not lose at those games
and which means military is gonna come
and that means that you're gonna keep
doing the zero sum up thing of
arms races right to continue to maintain
adaptive power which means you put all
the resources into it the exact wrong
things things that not only don't
support life support of anything and
that don't make the scarce resources
better utilized I think the scarce
resources poorly utilized and increase
our risk of extinction every bit of the
way because if anyone does that
everybody has to do it
so to go deep with that any system of
differential advantage right finite
games that are zero-sum is
which means any private balance sheets
that will always end up generating those
meaning that scarce resources not
competing for the scarce resources and
you possess them rather than have access
to them and you possessing that means I
don't have access and the more that I
possess the more I do better at every
level of Maslow's hierarchy that in that
herbally leads to dynamics that will
continue to cascade into progressively
worse clusterfuck so we've basically
since private balance sheets we've had
Wars over resources it's just as we keep
getting more and more people and as the
legislative ability the judicial ability
to try and stop that acting from
happening is less and less capable as
economics has learn better and better
strategies to deal with that and our
technological capacities are increasing
our population is increasing those
strategies that always resulted in Unruh
noble destruction of resources and war
just lead to Unruh noble destruction of
resources that in the biospheres
capacity support life and more than ends
of masters capacity support life and
technology that's powerful enough that
even accidentally ends the capacity
support life so we've actually been on
on a trajectory towards us inexorably as
long as we've been on private balance
sheets and then all of the additional
dynamics that have kicked in
limited-liability
etc have been connects herbal
evolutionary byproducts of differential
advantage to begin this which means
we've been individual agents that had
not yet cohered into a super organism
and basically we're at the point now
where those those organisms are fighting
each other with a strong enough capacity
to destroy the whole ecosystem in which
they live so it doesn't work for any of
them so they either have to unify in the
super organism or die that's kind of
where we're at and so then it's how do
we unify the super organism well how do
you get all of the agents to align their
agency so how do you make sure that the
incentive of every agent is as close to
perfectly aligned with the well-being of
every other agent then of the Commons as
possible so that all the internality
czar externalize so that we are
conferring advantage and resource to
that which is only positive we're not
confer
advantage and resource to that which is
externalizing Home Economics sits right
at the intersection of worldview and
infrastructure because worldview is what
do we value we value or our people our
religion our nation whole skin color
whatever
more so you know worldview is what are
we value that it's the basis of what
we're working towards infrastructures
how we meet our physical needs in
relationship with the physical planet
and build tools of advantage right
because we increase our adaptive
capacity unlike other animals where
they're just corporeal tools given the
gaps of capacity we extend ourselves
through our extracorporeal tools and so
infrastructure is the extensions of
ourselves that lead to the adaptive
capacity of the group that is developing
those and so economics sits right at the
intersection between value systems and
our increased physical adaptive capacity
because it's how we codify value systems
in a value equation what are we actually
going to ascribe value and confer power
to right if we're looking for
differential advantage and there's no
real way to get differential advantage
from air there's enough of it we're
buddy can have access to it so it's
worth noting because it's worth noting
we have no economic incentive to not
burn it up and pollute it right if
there's a resource that there's not that
much of then I want to own it's like a
differential advantage even if that
provides only symbolic advantage so all
the gold sits in safes we don't actually
do anything with the goal but because
there's a scarce amount of it or at
least a believ scarce amount of it we
will ruin ecosystems and fight wars to
get the goal to put it in safes that
provide no utility value Samedi so that
you know or the whale being worth real
tangible money dead or whaling though
but nothing alive what does it mean that
the Commons has no balance sheet you
know that is respected that's a set of
value systems right differential
advantage value systems that are then
codified in a value equation that then
determine what technology and
infrastructure is built and how it's
applied and so we have to all of those
our value systems our infrastructure and
tools and our social systems economic
Nuala language they're all intersecting
each other but we can simply say so for
to move up and they're all inter
self-stabilizing so you actually can't
have an omni considerate worldview as
long as you have infrastructure we're
meeting your needs requires hurting the
rest of the world because in order to
meet your needs through that system you
have to justify doing which may be able
to down regulate empathy so do tools
affect our world leave absolutely
inexorably right they're all interacting
so we have to move our worldview or
social systems and our infrastructure
holistically the next self-stabilizing
complex up so what we're interested in
is what are the necessary and sufficient
activities transforms have to happen in
each of those areas to lead to a new
self stabilizing dynamic that is anti
fragile in the presence of all the
dynamics we were actually facing over
the next period of time so Hansy fragile
to exponential technology so in order to
move up to the mill next
self-stabilizing complex we can actually
define the high level criteria of what
has to transform in each of those
categories and how they intersect each
other and we can define all of them in
terms of closing causal feedback loops
that have been open so in the area of
infrastructure part of why
infrastructure has been why it is
fundamentally not only unsustainable but
that means self terminating is because
we have primarily a linear materials
economy where we're taking stuff out of
the earth faster than it can renew and
then turning into traps between traps
back in there faster than it can be
naturally biodegradable so that means we
were converting a living ecosystem into
dead zones and trash at a rate that
requires exponential year-over-year
growth of the total linear materials
economy right because capital has to
expand year over year and that sits on
top of materials economy to not debase
the currency you have to increase goods
and services etcetera so we have to
close that loop where the stuff that was
trash becomes the basis to make new
stuff and we have continuous closed-loop
cycling that is post growth meaning it
doesn't require growth
doesn't mean you can't ever grow but we
have a system that is actually stable
without more net atoms coming into the
materials economy now we're gonna be
getting more photons all the time we're
gonna be getting input of energy so it's
not a closed system but it's let's say
it's close to atoms or it's at least it
doesn't require input of new atoms well
then you can continue to upcycle albums
right you can take the trash and turn
back into new stuff where the new stuff
keeps upcycling in the higher and higher
forms because you keep having new energy
and new pattern right new information in
design we have to have a system that is
closed-loop post growth and upcycling as
far as the materials economy goes if
it's not those things it is
mathematically self terminating and as
you buy the moon we can connect that set
of ideas back to just the basic
framework of how comments about the
system self-regulating in general yes
generalized problem Daniels not talking
about how these generalized problem
applies in the zone of internal flexibly
register so when we study complex
adaptive systems or the things that we
see in all of the complex adaptive
systems is that they are defined by
closed causal feedback loops and then
massive parallel processing and so
closed causal feedback loops means every
organism is defined by its capacity to
sense the environment right sends the
environment and itself so it's external
and internal sensing sense-making
information processing capacity of all
that to then be able to actually have a
sense of what's really going on from all
those sensory channels and all the past
information etc to then inform action
and then actuator capacity to act on the
world and then the ability why it's
closed loop is that can sense the way
that it acted on the world and then that
worked well or didn't work well now
we're left in order to go right you know
and so it can continue to up regulate
its capacity with Clos lucé one of the
and you think about sensory systems
motor systems and cortex for information
kind of processing systems right in
animals what do you think about it those
necessarily co-evolved because there
would be no evolutionary advantage and a
lot of evolutionary disadvantage to send
stuff that we couldn't act on right just
be
freaked out about stuff or if we acted
and couldn't in turn sense the effect
that it happened then we would have no
way of knowing if the action with
adaptive right so would mean we do a lot
of non adaptive action
so those three co-evolve
and they define the organism right what
happened with humans our capacity for
abstraction allowed us to see what we
were doing in all those areas and build
tools that extended those capacities
independent of each other so we started
to as our tools group break open the
feedback loop so we started with mostly
actuator tools right we hammer would
extend their fist and plow would extend
their digging ability and extend that
now to our fist is extended through the
entire military industrial complex right
and you know continental ballistic
missiles are extension of that capacity
and the entire industrial supply chain
is a the extension our capacity to go
pick something or cut you know cut
something down well if I'm affecting
things every time I purchase across all
the continents through massive global
high supply chains I can't sense what's
happening at all to them for my
decisions right that's a completely
broken open and causal feedback loop in
turn I can send stuff through the
internet and billions of pages of
everything from our you know from Hubble
telescope to electron tunneling
microscopes to everything in between
but there's more information than we can
actually vet if it's true or not parse
and synthesize together to actually know
what's really going on anywhere so our
sensory input we can't actually make
sense of and then to the degree that we
can make sense of things so we've also
extended our capacity technologically
with computation to make sense of stuff
but if we really get climate change is
real we don't have act on it right so
basically we have broken open our
information processing systems and that
is core to why we're not adaptive right
its core to why we are doing quarterly
actions that are increasing our risk of
extinction is because we don't factor
what's happening well enough put all the
pieces together to inform
decision-making you know continue to
cycle that so we have to close the
incentive loop so that the incentive of
some agents and the well-being of other
agents in the comments since they
inexorably in or affect each other on a
little biosphere where we all have in
capacity to affect each other that's
actually another key part to say is when
our capacity to affect each other was
not existential the idea of winning a
win-lose game makes sense right let's
make sure our military is better than
there so we can actually win this thing
when we both have nukes nobody can win
right and the idea of being able to just
beat them economically by we can cut
down trees faster than they can and
actually just build up more economic
surplus when we weren't at risk of
cutting down all trees right or
overfishing the entire ocean that made
sense when lose games at our level of
power are all lose-lose games
so basically win-lose has become an
obsolete game theoretic model now we
either have win win or we have lose lose
and we have no space in between that's a
big deal to get that right and it's not
that they weren't true before it's that
they were true at a certain level of
power that not true anymore
and so we have to figure out the win-win
games where anyone's incentive and
advantage is tied to collective
advantage because if I go hurt somebody
and I engendered their enmity and they
have existential tech I myself
right if I go increase the speed at
which I can extract resources from the
environment and a competitive game with
others who are doing that but we're
heading towards the tipping points of
chemical irreversibility of those peak
resources in the environment we just
 ourselves radically so we have to
get over those bad Nash equilibriums of
bad you know win those games and so that
is full incentive alignment and that
requires so we can say you know come
back we're saying we have to close the
loops in infrastructure right so we can
think about the materials economy being
a totally closed-loop materials economy
we have to close the loops in human
incentives which means the incentive of
all agents when well-being of other
agents in the Commons are perfectly
aligned we have to close loops at the
level of world view which means our
definition of self and our definition of
everything else on the biosphere are not
definable with outside of relationship
with each other right the idea that I
can advantage myself at the expense of
other things goes because that idea is
existentially unsafe it says it's not
true it's essentially unsafe in the
presence of the level of technology we
have so that when
games require separate sense of self
right as soon as we have the idea of
self as an emergent property of
everything right as a fundamentally
interconnected dynamic emergent property
of the biosphere then they can't get
ahead at the expense of that which my
life is fundamentally nor connected to
so the world that's a closed you get the
level of self and other right worldview
has to closely but we could just say
because economics sits right at the
junction of worldview and but we could
actually say if you if you succeed at
any of those you succeeded because you
can only succeed at any of those by all
of them succeeding but it's a fairly
succinct one to say if we align the
incentive of every agent with the
well-being of every other agent in the
Commons and we succeeded that way
thereby internalizing all externality
there by incentivizing only only
positive behavior well you can't do that
without the right infrastructure they
can actually measure on the positive
behavior right you have to have the
kinds of sensor systems it can actually
measure a balance sheet of the Commons
and make sure that the action is that
enriching the balance sheet of the
Commons you have to have the data
processing that can take all that
sentencing and make sense of it you know
so that capacity requires tooling shifts
and you know worldview shifts but that
is essentially what our task is one way
of framing what our task is so