[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to make wakening from the
meaning crisis this is episode 31 so
last time we were taking a look at
trying to progress in an attempt to give
at least a plausible suggestion of a
scientific theory of how we could
explain relevance realization and one of
the things we examined it was the
distinction between a theory of
relevance and a theory of relevance
realization and I made the argument that
we cannot have a scientific theory of
relevance precisely because of a lack of
systematic import but we can have a
theory of relevance realization and then
I gave you the analogy of that which I'm
building towards something stronger than
an analogy of Darwin's theory of
evolution by natural selection and that
which Darwin proposed a virtual engine
that regulates the reproductive cycle so
that the system constantly evolves the
biological fitness of organisms to a
constantly changing environment and then
the analogy is there is a virtual engine
in the embodied brain and why it's
embodied will become clear embodied
embedded brain will become clear in this
lecture but there is a a virtual engine
that regulates the sensory motor loop so
that my cognitive interactional fitness
is constantly being shaped it's
constantly evolving to deal with a
constantly changing environment and what
I in fact need as I argued is a system
of constraints because I'm trying to
write between selectively and enabling
constraints to limit and zero in on
relevant information and then I was
trying to argue that the way in which
that operates we saw that what needs to
be sort of related to an auto poetic
system and then the way that operates
the
self-organisation I suggested operates
in terms of a design that you see many
scales and we need member of multi scale
Euler theory in terms of your biological
and cognitive organization and that's in
terms of opponent processing we took a
look at the opponent processing within
the autonomic nervous system that is
constantly by the strong analogy
evolving your level of arousal to the
environment opposing goals but enter a
related function then I propose to you
that we could look for the kinds of
properties that we're going to be
talking about the level at which we're
going to be pitching a theory of
relevance realization which is the
theory of bio economic properties that
are operating not according to
normativity of truth or validity not
logical normativity but logistical
normativity and the two most important
logistical norms I would propose to you
our efficiency and resiliency and then I
made an argument that they would be
susceptible to opponent processing
precisely because they are in a
trade-off relationship with each other
and that if we could get a a cognitive
virtual engine that regulates the
sensory motor loop by systematically
playing off selective constraints on
efficiency second it selective
logistical economic constraints on
efficiency and enabling economic
constraints on resiliency then we could
give an explanation a theory deeply
analogous to Darwin's theory of the
evolution were cross individuals of
biological fitness we could give an
account of the cognitive evolution
within individuals cognition of their
cognitive interactional fitted Ness the
way they are shaping the problem space
so as to adaptively be well fitted to
achieving their interactional goals with
the environment
before I move on to try and make that
more specific and make some suggestions
as how this might be realized and the
neural machinery of brains I want to
point out why I keep emphasizing this
embodied embedded and I want to say a
little bit more about this because I
also want to return to something I
promised to return to why I want to
resist both sort of an empiricist notion
of of relevance detection and a romantic
notion of relevance projection so the
first thing is why am I saying embodied
because what I've been trying to argue
is there is a deep dependency a deep
connection and the dependency runs from
propositional through to down to
participatory but there is a deep
dependency between your cognitive agency
as an right as an intelligent problem
solver and a channel you know an intent
of an intelligent general problem solver
and the fact that your brain exists
within a bio economy the body is not
Cartesian clay that we drag around and
shape according to the whims or desires
of our you know totally self enclosed or
Descartes immaterial minds the body is
not a useless appendage it is not just a
vehicle so even here I'm criticizing
sort of certain platonic models the body
body is an auto poetic Bioeconomy that
makes your cognition possible without an
auto poetic Bioeconomy you do not have
the machinery necessary for the ongoing
evolution of relevance realization the
body is constitutive of your cognitive
agency in a profound way
why embedded and this will also lead us
into the rejection of both sort of an
empiricist and a romantic interpretation
all right
I embedded the biological fitted nosov a
creature is not a property of the
creature per se right
it is a real relation between the
creature and its environment is a great
white shark intrinsically adapted no it
makes no sense to ask that question
because if I take this supposedly apex
predator really adopted and put it in
the desert you know the Sahara Desert it
dies within minutes right it's
adaptivity is not a property right
intrinsic to it per se it's out
apptivity is not something that it
detects in the environment
it's adaptivity is a real relation on
affordance between it and the
environment in a similar way well I
would argue that relevance is not a
property in the object it is not a
property of the subjectivity of my mind
it is not a property of objectivity nor
a property of subjectivity it is
precisely a property that is who
co-created by how the environment and
the embodied brain are fitted together
in a dynamic evolving fashion it is very
much like the bottle being graspable
this is not a property of the bottle nor
a property of my hand but a PI real
relation a real relation on how they can
be fit fitted together function together
so I would argue we should not see
relevance as something that we
subjectively project as the romantic
claims we should not see relevance as
something we merely
you write detect from the objectivity of
objects as perhaps we might if we had an
empiricist bet I want to propose a term
to you I want to argue that relevance is
in this sense transgenerational between
the organism and its environment we
should not think of it as being
projected we should not think of it as
being detected this is why I have
consistently used the term we should
think of relevance as being realized
because the point about the term
realization is it has two aspects to it
and I'm trying to triangulate from those
two aspects what do I mean by that there
is an objective sense to realization
which is to make real and if that's not
an objective thing I don't know what
counts making real that's objective but
of course there is a subjective sense to
realization which is coming into
awareness and what I'm I'm using both
these words I'm using both these senses
of the same word I'm not equivocating I
am trying to triangulate to the trans
Jetty of relevance realization that is
why I'm talking about something that is
both embodied necessarily so and
embedded necessarily so notice how non
or perhaps better anti Cartesian this is
the connection between mind if what you
mean by mind is your capacity for
consciousness and cognition right and
body is one of dependence of
constitutive need your mind needs your
body
we're also talking not only about it
being embodied embedded it is inherently
a transient realization the world and
the organism are co-creating Co
determining Co evolving the fitted nasaw
let's now return to it
the proposal now before before Lia turn
notice what this is going to notice what
this is telling us this is telling us
that a lot of the grammar by which we
try to talk about ourselves and a
relationship to reality the subjective
objective
both of these are reifying and they--and
and their inherent claims they're the
idea that relevance is a thing that has
an essence that in here's in the subject
or @ relevance is a thing that has an
essence that in here's in the object
both of those that standard grammar and
the adversarial right partisan debates
we often have I am arguing need to be
transcended need to be transcended and I
would then propose to you that that's
going to have a fundamental impact on
how we interpret spirituality if again
by spirituality we mean a sense and a
functional sense of connectedness that
affords wisdom self transcendence etc
so back to the idea of efficiency
resiliency trade-offs I would point to
to the work of Marcus breed and he's got
work sort of mathematically showing that
when you're creating networks especially
neural networks you're going to optimize
and we talked about optimization again
in the previous video you're going to
optimize between efficiency and
resiliency that's how you're going to
get them to function the best you can
and what I want to try and do is try to
show you the relationship right the
poles of the transductive 'ti and how
that's going to come out or at least
point towards the generative
relationship that can be discussed in
terms of these poles so I argued that
initially the machinery of relevance
realization has to be in kernel now
again this is why I just did what I did
when I say internal I don't mean
subjective I don't mean inside the
introspective space of the mind when I'm
talking about the the goals are internal
I mean internal to an embodied embedded
right brain body system an autopoietic
system of adaptivity in fact there's
many people who are arguing cognitive
science that those two terms are
interdependent just like I'm arguing
that relevance realization is dependent
on Auto police's being an adaptive
system and being an auto dependence
sorry an auto poetic system are also
interdependent system can only be
continually self making if it has some
capacity to adapt to changes in its
environment and a system is only
adaptive if it is trying to maintain
itself and that only makes sense if it
has real needs if it's an auto poetic
thing so these things are actually
deeply interlocked relevance realization
Auto paresis
and adaptivity so as Marcus breed has
argued and other people and I'm giving
you independent argument you you want to
get a way of optimizing between
efficiency and resilience that you don't
want remember with the autonomic nervous
system this doesn't mean getting some
average or right stable Mead it means
the system can move sometimes giving
more emphasis to efficiency sometimes
giving more emphasis to resiliency just
like your autonomic nervous system is
constantly evolving constantly
recalibrating your level of arousal now
what I want to do is pick up on how
those constraints might cash out in
particular I'll put this a little bit
farther over here how these logistical
norms understood as constraints can be
realized in particular virtual engines
so and I want to do this by talking
about internal bio economic properties
and then for lack of a better wait for
this contrast and again this does not
map on to the subjectivity objectivity I
don't have to keep saying that correct
okay external interactional properties
by external I mean that these right
eventually are going to give rise to
goals in the world as opposed to
constitutive goals in the system and
what I want to do is show you how you go
back and forth
now it'll make sense to do this in terms
of reverse engineering because it will
just help to make more sense because I'm
starting from what you understand in
yourself and then working so often I
will start here and go this way so you
want to be right adaptive we
said you want to be a general problem
solver and that's important but notice
that that means there's two kinds of and
people don't like when I use this word
but I don't have an alternative word but
so I'm just going to use it just if
there's two kinds of machines you can be
by that what I mean by that is a system
right that is capable of solving
problems and pursuing goals in some
fashion if I want to be adaptive what do
i what do i what do i what kind of
machine do I want to be well I might
want to be a general-purpose machine now
these terms are always when I keep
showing you that are always relative
they're comparative terms in relative I
don't think anything is absolutely
general or absolutely special-purpose
it's always a comparative term alright
but let me give you an example my hand
is a general-purpose machine right my
hand is such that it can be used in many
many different contexts for many many
different tasks so it's very general
purpose all right now the problem with
being a jack-of-all-trades is that you
are master of none so the problem with
my hand being general purpose is that
for specific tasks it can be out
competed by a special purpose machine so
right although this is a good general
purpose machine it is nowhere you know
as good as a hammer for driving in a
nail no good as a nowhere as good as a
screwdriver for removing a screw etc etc
so right in some contexts special
purpose machines outperform general
purpose machines but you wouldn't want
the following you wouldn't want you know
I you're gonna be stranded on a desert
island like maybe Tom Hanks and castaway
and he lost all of his special purpose
tools they sink to the bottom of the
ocean that causes them a lot of distress
literally what he starts with that first
is his hands the general purpose
machines and the problem you see that
wow they're not doing very good
just if I just had a good knife right
but the problem is I wouldn't want well
not Tom Hanks but his character forget
the character's name
I think it's Jack you wouldn't have Jack
Jack I'm going to cut off your hands and
you know that I can attach a knife here
and you know a hammer here and now you
have a hammer a knife it's like no no no
I don't want that either
I don't want just a motley collection of
special purpose machines okay so
sometimes your adaptive by being a
general-purpose machine sometimes your
adoptive by being a special purpose
machine so general purpose machine you
use the same thing over and over again
sometimes we make a joke about somebody
using a special purpose machine as a
general purpose machine right when all
you have is a hammer everything looks
like a nail right and the joke there is
right and it strikes us as a joke
because we know that hammers are
special-purpose things and everything
isn't a nail it's not so much a joke if
I say you know sometimes when all you
have is a hand everything looks
graspable that's not so weird okay so
what are we what am I trying to get you
to see what I'm trying to get you to see
is you want to be able to move between
these this is very efficient why because
I'm using the same thing over and over
again the same function over and over
again or at least the state this same
set of tightly bound functions right the
thing about special purpose right is I
won't use it there you know I don't use
it that often I use my hammer sometimes
and my saw sometimes and my screwdriver
Center and I have to carry around the
toolbox now the problem with that is it
gets very inefficient because a lot of
the times I'm carrying my hammer around
and I'm not using it so I have to bear
the cost of carrying it around and I'm
not using it so it's very inefficient
but you know what it makes me it makes
me Trent tremendously resilient
because when there's a lot of new things
unexpected specific issues that my
general purpose thing can't handle I'm
ready for them
I have resiliency I've got differences
within my tool box kit that allow me to
deal with these special circumstances so
notice what I want to do I want
something want to constantly trade
between them I wants to cook I want to
constantly trade between them now what
I'm gonna do I did that to show you this
I'm then now going to reorganize it this
way because when I'm going to show you
what I'm arguing is general purpose is
more efficient special purpose is making
you more resilient and you want to trade
between them okay so okay now those are
interactional properties and you said I
sort of get the analogy what does that
have to do with the brain and Bioeconomy
right so how would you try to make
information processing more efficient
well what I want to do is I want to try
and make the process I'm using the
functions I'm using to be as
generalizable as possible that will get
me general purpose because I can use the
same function in many places then I'm
very efficient how do you do that how do
you do that well here's what I want to
pause and I want to introduce just a
tiny bit of narrative in here when I was
writing this paper with Tim little comp
and Blake Richards but especially this
was Tim's great insight you've got to
get in if you're interested in
cutting-edge AI you really need to pay
attention to the work that Tim little
crap is doing
Tim's a former student of mine he's
calling in many ways of course he's
greatly surpassed my knowledge and
expertise is one of the cutting edge
people and artificial intelligence and
he had a great insight here I was
proposing this model this theory to him
and he said but you know you should
reverse-engineer it in a certain way and
I said what I mean what he says well
you're acting as if you're just
proposing this top down but what you
should see is that many of the things
you're talking about are already being
used within the AI community so the
paper we published was relevance
realization and the emerging framework
in cognitive science namely that a lot
of the strategies are going to talk
about here are strategies that are
already being developed now I'm going to
have to talk about this at a very
abstract level because which one of the
particular architecture is a particular
application is going to turn out to be
the right one we don't know yet that's
still something in progress but I I
think Tim's point is very well taken
that we shouldn't be talking about this
in a vacuum we should also see that the
people who are trying to make artificial
intelligence are already implementing
some of these strategies that I'm going
to point out and I think that's very
telling the fact that we're getting
convergent argument that way ok so how
do I make a information processing
function more generalizable how do I do
that
well I want to I mean you know how we do
it and because you we've talked about it
before but you do it in science all
right so here's two variables for
example it's not limited to two right
right and so right I have a scatter plot
and what they taught you to do right was
a line of best fit all right this is
standard move in Cartesian graphing now
why do you do a line of best fit you
know and my line of best fit might
actually touch none of my data points
does that mean I'm being ridiculously
irresponsible to the data I'm just
gauging an arm trust population no why
do we do this why do we do a line of
best fit all right well while we're
doing this is because it allows us to
interpolate and extrapolate it allows us
to go beyond the data now we're taking a
chance and of course all good science
and this is this was the great insight
of popper
all good science takes good chances
right but here's the thing I do this so
that I can make predictions right what
the value of y will be when I have a
certain value of x that I've never
obtained I can interpolate and
extrapolate that means I can generalize
the function so this is data compression
this is data compression what I'm trying
to do is basically pick up on what's
invariant the idea is that the
information always contains noise and
I'm trying to pick up on what's
invariant and extend that and of course
that's part and parcel of why we do this
because in science we're trying to do
the inductive generalizations etc etc so
the way in which I make my functionality
more general more general purpose is if
I can do a lot of data compression so if
the data compression allows me to
generalize my function and that
generalization is feeding through the
sensorimotor loop in a way that is
protecting and promoting my autopoietic
goals it's going to be reinforced but
what about the opposite what was
interesting at the time I think this
meant some people have picked this up on
a term we didn't have a term for this
and I remember there was a whole
afternoon where Tim and I were just
trying to come up with what do we want
for the trade-off so this is making your
information processing more efficient
more general-purpose
what makes it more special purpose more
resilient and so we came up with the
term particularization
and tim's point and i'm not going to go
into detail here tim's point is this is
the general strategy that's at working
things like the wake-sleep algorithm
that is at the heart of the deep
learning promoted by Geoffrey Hinton who
was at U of T and Tim
was a very significant student of Jeff's
and so this is the abstract explanation
of how that strategy that's at work in a
lot of the deep learning of that's at
the core of a lot of successful they are
what particular ization is is right as
I'm trying to keep more in track with
the data I'm trying to create a function
that over fits in some sense to that
data that will get me more specifically
in contact with this particular
situation so this tends to emphasize
what is invariant this tends to get the
system to pick up on more variations so
this will make the system more cross
contextual it can move across contexts
because it can generalize this will tend
to make the system more
context-sensitive and of course you
don't want to maximize any one of these
you want them dynamically trading and
notice how they are is this the right
word I hope so obeying it sounds so
anthropomorphic notice how they're
obeying the logistical normativity
trading between efficiency and
resiliency and though there's various
ways of doing this right and there's
lots of interesting ways of engineering
this into but that's creating a virtual
engine engineering this creating sets of
constraints on this so this will
oscillate in the right way and optimize
that way and so the idea is when you've
got this as something that's following
the completely internal bio economic
logistical norms it will result in the
evolution of sensorimotor interaction
that is going to make a system core an
organism constantly adaptively
like moving between being
general-purpose and being
special-purpose it will become very
adaptive now different organisms will be
biologically skewed one way or the other
even individuals will be biologically
skewed so there are people now proposing
for example right that we might
understand certain psychopathologies in
terms of some people are more biased
towards overfitting to particular izing
and some people are more biased towards
compressing and generalizing they these
people tend towards right see many
connections where there aren't
connections right and these people tend
to be very feature ly bound okay
what's another one another oh so this is
compression particularization right we
called we call this cognitive scope and
we called this applicability how much
you can apply your function or functions
and the idea is if you you can get scope
going the right way it will it will and
there's no other way of it will attach
to it will get coupled to it's not
representing it will get coupled to
right this pattern of interaction which
will fit you well to the dynamics of
change and stability in the environment
okay
what's another thing well
a lot of people are talking about this
you'll see people even talking about
this in AI very significantly
exploration versus right exploiting
versus exploration so here's another
trade-off this tends to be in terms of
the scope of your information this has
to do more with the timing so here's the
question should I stay here and try and
get as much as I can out of here
or should that's exploiting or should I
move and try and find new things new
potential sources of resource and reward
they're in a trade-off relationship
because the longer I stay here the more
opportunity cost I accrue but the more I
move around the less I can actually draw
from the environment so do I want to
maximize either no I want to trade
between them I'm always trading between
exploiting and exploring there's
different strategies that might be at
work here I've seen recent work in which
you this is you try to you reward when a
system doesn't make an error and then
you reward when it makes an error and of
course those are in a trade-off
relationship and this sort of makes it
more curious this makes it it more sort
of conscientious if I have to speak
anthropomorphic ly one way we thought
you could do this is you could trade so
one way you can do this is you can
reward error all right sorry reward
error reduction
reward error increase way we talked
about in the paper is you can trade-off
between what's called temporal
displacement learning and inhibition on
return I won't go into the dynamics
there what I can say is there's
different strategies being considered
and being implemented and and this is
cognitive tempering having to do with
both temper and the relationship between
Tom and time right and this has to do
with the project-- ability of your
processing now first of all a couple
things are we claiming that these are
exhaustive no they are not exhaustive
they are exemplary they're not
exhaustive they're exemplary of the ways
in which you can trade between
efficiency and resiliency and create
virtual engines that will adopt by
constrained by setting up systems of
constraints the sensorimotor loop the
interactions with the environment an
evolving manner so exploit wise
exploitation efficient because right I
don't have to expend very much I can
just stay here right but it depends on
things sort of staying the same
exploration is I have to expend a lot of
energy I have to move around and it's
only rewarding if there's significant
difference if I go to be and it's the
same as a you know what I should have
done state an a so do you see what's
happening all of these in different ways
this has to do with the applicability
the scope this has to do with the
projected bility that time but all of
these you're trading between that
sometimes what makes something relevant
is how it's the same how it's invariant
sometimes what makes something relevant
is how it's different how it changes and
you have to constantly shift the balance
between those because that's what
reality
he is doing that's what reality is doing
what's another one well another type of
one I think there are many of these
right and they are not going to act in
an arbitrary fashion because they are
all regulated by the trade off
normativity the opponent processing
between efficiency and resiliency notice
these are both what are called different
cost functions they are dealing again
with the bio economics how right how
you're dealing with the cost of
processing right so playing between the
costs and benefits of these etc but you
might also need to play between these
alright so it's also possible that we
have right what we call cognitive
prioritization in which you have cost
functions being played off against each
other different right so here's a cost
function here's a cost function they're
playing so cost function one right and
cost function two for playing off
against each other and you may and you
have to do you have to sort of decide
here and this overlaps with what's
called signal detection theory and other
things I won't get into you have to be
very flexible in how you gamble because
you may decide right that you will try
and sort of hedge your bets and activate
as many functions as you can or you may
try to go for the big thing and say no
I'm going to give real a lot of priority
to just this function of course you
don't want that maximize you want
flexible gambling
sometimes you're focusing right
sometimes you're diversifying
you create a kind of integrative
function all of this can be and if you
check in the paper all of this can be
represented mathematically once again I
am NOT claiming this is exhaustive I'm
claiming it's exemplary I think these
are important I think scope and time
right cost functions and prioritizing
between cost functions I think it's it's
very plausible that they are part and
parcel of our cognitive processing
what I want you to think about is I'm
representing this abstractly think about
the each one of these you know here's
scope
here's tempering and then of course
there is right the prioritization that
is playing between them I want to think
it's the you think of this as a space
and these functions because they are all
being right governed regulated sorry
regulated in this fashion relevance
realization is always taking place in
this space and at this moment it's got
this particular value according to
tempering and scope and prioritization
and then it moves to this value and then
to this value into this value and then
to this value and then out to this value
it's moving around in a state space
that's what it is that's what's
happening when you're doing relevance
realization but although this is I
represented how this is dynamic I
haven't shown you how and why it would
be developmental
I'm going to do this with just one of
these because I could teach an entire
course just on relevance realization
okay when you're doing data compression
you're emphasizing how you can integrate
information remember like the line of
best fit you're emphasizing integration
and because you're trying to pick up on
what's invariant and of course that's
going to be versus that's going to be
verse differentiation now I think you
can make a very clear argument that
these map very well on to the two
fundamental processes that are locked in
opponent processing that pIJ one of the
founding figures of developmental
psychology said driving said drive
development this is what prj called
assimilation assimilation is you have a
cognitive schema and what is a cognitive
schema again it is a set of constraints
and you have a cognitive schema right
and what that set of constraints do is
it makes you integrate it makes you
treat the new information as the same as
what you got you integrate it you
assimilate it that's compression what's
the opposite for Piaget well it's
accommodation and that's why of course
when people talk about exploratory
emotions like awe they invoke
accommodation as a Piaget ting principle
because it opens you up what does it do
it causes you to change your structure
your schemas what why do we do this well
because it's very efficient why do we
have to do this because if we just
pursue efficiency if we just assimilate
our machinery gets brittle and
distortive it has to go through
accommodation and how straight introduce
variation it has to rewire and
restructure itself so that it can
again respond to a more complex
environment so not only is relevance
realization inherently dynamic it is
inherently developmental when a system
is self-organizing
there is no deep distinction between its
function and its development it develops
by functioning but by functioning it
develops when a system is simultaneously
integrating and differentiating it is
complexify complexification a system is
highly complex if it is both highly
differentiated and highly integrated now
why but if I'm highly differentiated I
can do many different things but if I do
many different things and I'm not highly
integrated I will fly apart as a system
so I need to be both highly
differentiated so I can do many
different things and highly integrated
so I stay together as an integrated
system as systems complexify they self
transcend they go through qualitative
development let me give you an analogy
for this notice how I keep using
biological analogies that is not a
coincidence you started out life as a
zygote a fertilized cell a singular cell
the egg and the sperm your zygote
initially all that happens is the cells
just reproduce but then something very
interesting starts to happen you get
cellular differentiation some of the
cells start to become lung cells some of
them start to become I sell some of them
start to become organ cells but they
don't just differentiate they integrate
they literally self organ eyes into a
heart organ an i right
you developed through a process at least
biologically of biological
complexification what does that give you
that gives you emergent abilities you
transcend yourself as a system when I
was a zygote I could not vote I could
not give this lecture I now have those
functions in fact when I was a zygote I
couldn't learn what I needed to learn in
order to do this lecture I did not have
that qualitative competence I did not
have those functions but as a system
complexified notice what I'm showing you
as a system is going through relevance
realization it is also complexified it
is getting new emergent abilities of how
we can interact with the environment and
then extend that relevance realization
into that emergent self transcendence if
you're a relevant realizing thing you're
inherently dynamical self-organizing
autopoietic things which means you an
inherently developmental thing which
means you are an inherently
self-transcending thing
I want to make clear an argument that
might well I want to respond to a
potential argument that you might have
was like well I get all of this but
maybe relevance realization is a bunch
of many different functions first of all
I I'm not disagreeing with the idea that
a lot of our intelligence is carried
with heuristics and some of those are
more special-purpose and some of the
more general-purpose and we need to
learn how to trade off between them
however I do want to claim that
relevance realization is a unified
phenomena and I'm going to do this in a
two-part way the first is to first
assert and then I will later
substantiate that when we're talking
about general intelligence in fact
that's what this whole argument is bit
we're talking about relevance
realization now this goes to work I did
with Leo Ferraro who was a psychometrist
somebody who actually does psychometric
testing on people's intelligence and one
of the things we know from Spearman way
back in the 20s right is in he
discovered what's called the general
factor of intelligence sometimes called
general intelligence and sometimes
there's a debate about whether we should
identify those or not I'm not going to
get into that right now right what
Spearman found was right that how kids
were doing in math was actually
predictive of how they were doing in
English and even how they were doing
contrary to what our our culture says
how they're doing in sports there's
right how I'm doing in all these
different tasks was how I did one a did
an a was predictive at how I did in B
and vice-versa
right this is a what's called a strong
positive manifold there is this huge
right inter predictability between how
you do an all these very many different
tasks that is your general intelligence
many people would argue and I would
agree that this is the capacity that
underwrites you being a general problem
solver
often when we're testing for
intelligence were chest testing for
therefore general intelligence I'll put
the panel up as we go along oh just what
Leo showed me we made a good argument is
that the things we study when we're
studying right like when you're doing
something like the Wechsler test or
something that psychometric test right
so you will test things like a
comprehension the comprehension subset
and of course you'll concentrate on
similarity judgments right you'll also
do what right the similarities of
pictures other people have talked about
your ability to adapt to unpredictable
environments there's other work by
governments and in others the ability to
deal with complex workplaces what I call
G loaded that require a lot now when you
trace these back right what this points
to is your capacity for problem
formulation the similarity judgments in
what are called the adduction abilities
the ability to draw out latent patterns
right this of course is similarity
judgment this is a similarity judgment
and pattern finding pattern finding
right the complex you know this is
basically dealing with very ill-defined
dynamic situations
the thing is right and adapting to
complex environments
so this is general intelligence this is
how we generally tempted to general
intelligence we test people across all
these different kinds of tasks and what
we find is a strong predictive manifold
there's some general ability behind us
but notice these problem formulation
similarity simply you know similarity
judgments pattern finding dealing with
ill-defined dynamic situations adapting
to complex environments that's exactly
all the places that I've argued we need
relevance realization relevance
realization what I would argue is
actually the underlying ability of your
general intelligence that's how we test
for it this is the things that came out
right and you can even see you know
comprehension aspects in here all kinds
of things so relevance realization I
think is a very good candidate for your
general intelligence and so insofar as
general intelligence is a unified thing
and we have this is this look this is
one of the most robust findings in
psychology it's it just keeps happening
though there's always debates about it
ba bla bla ba and people don't like the
psychometric measures of intelligence
and I think that's because they're
confusing intelligence and relevance and
wisdom we'll come back to that they the
thing is this is a very powerful measure
if I it it's reliable this is from the
1920s
then this keeps getting replicated this
is not going through a replication
crisis and if I had to know one thing
about you in order to try and predict
you the one thing that outperforms
anything else is knowing this this will
tell me how you do in school how you do
in your relationships how well you treat
your health how long right you're likely
to live whether or not you're going to
get a job this crushes how well you do
in a in an interview in predicting
whether or not you'll get and keep a job
is this the only thing that's predictive
of you know and I'm going to argue later
that intelligence and rationality are
not identical but is this a real thing
and is it a unified thing yes and can we
make sense of the
this as relevance realization yes is
well of its realization there for a
unified thing yes
so relevance realization is your general
intelligence and what I'm arguing at
least that's what I'm arguing and that
your general intelligence can be
understood as a dynamic developmental
evolution of your sensory motor fitted
miss
is regulated by virtual engines that are
ultimately regulated by the logistical
normativity of the opponent processing
between efficiency and resiliency
so we've already integrated a lot of
psychology and the beginnings of biology
in neuroscience I want to next and we've
definitely integrated with some of the
best insights from artificial
intelligence what I want to do next time
to finish off this argument is to show
how this might be realized in dynamical
processes within the brain and how that
is lining up with some of our
cutting-edge ideas I'm spending so much
time on this because this is the
linchpin argument of the cognitive
science side of the whole series try to
show you how everything feeds in to
relevance realization if I can give you
a good scientific explanation of this in
terms of psychology artificial
intelligence biology neuro scientific
processing then it is legitimate and
plausible to say that I have a
naturalistic explanation of that and if
the history is and right pointing
towards this what I'm going to then have
the means to do is to argue how this and
we've already seen it how it's probably
embedded in your procedural respectable
participatory knowing it's embedded in
your trans jected dynamical coupling to
the environment and the affordance of
the age and arena relationship the
connectivity between mind and body the
connectivity between mind and world
we've seen it central to your
intelligence central to right your
functionality of your consciousness this
is going to allow me to explain so much
we've already seen it as affording an
account of why you're inherently
self-transcending we'll see that we can
use this machinery to come up with an
account of the relationship between
intelligence rationality and wisdom we
will be able to explain so much of
what's at the center of human
spirituality we will have a straw
plausibility argument for how we can
integrate cognitive science and human
spirituality in a way that may help us
to powerfully address the meeting crisis
thank you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you
[Music]