today I'm speaking with Peter Shuster H
a pan cyclists process psychedelic
philosopher it takes much influence from
Alfred North Whitehead shop in Hauer and
Nietzsche plan psychism refers roughly
to the idea that mind mentality
consciousness or sentience is in all
things process philosophy might roughly
be taken to mean that fundamental
reality consists in processes and not
things shop inherent nature of course
favor a sort of monastic metaphysical
principle the will whether to life or
power respectively as the ground of
reality now this is the first of a
three-part mini bloody series of which
the guiding theme is the relationship
between psychedelics and philosophy but
in this particular one we speak to a
range of points from ego dissolution to
Henri Bergson's notion of duration it's
the relationship between dreams and
psychedelic experience and the cycle of
destruction and creation more broadly we
begin by speaking to pizzas own
philosophical beginnings in its present
intellectual goals and how psychedelic
experience might inform such a pursuit
[Music]
okay well I am absolutely delighted to
be sitting in a room with he just
me I should have asked how to pronounce
your name appropriately I was thinking
that's the one thing I need to ask the
one thing go ahead Peter just at page
Peters just a page yep eh I know stands
for she stands for Hughes just too long
yeah I like it
sorry I just ruined your marketing
mystique I'm gonna move that there so I
can turn and face your little bit easier
you know what you will Michelle I'll
call you Peter
we'll make it simple okay okay so Peter
god damn I have traveled a little while
to talk to you
we're in Penzance which is right on the
southwest and most tip of the UK via
near the Lands End yeah why are you here
what am i here
well we're sitting in a little pub
called the North in upstairs sit mile
primary school impending and I was
brought up here most of my life I was
born in Sweden but my father's from
London and he had a friend who was a
plotter based in Newland which is a next
depends ants very good friends so they
decided to move here after seeing how
sublime the natural beauty is here and
so yeah they moved here 10 years before
I was born but I was born in Sweden
nonetheless I moved here as a baby a few
years in Sweden I spent and then I sort
of moved to London I taught philosophy
in London College there for six years
and then five six years ago I moved back
here and I've settled in a house in
nearby and I love it here I mean it's
just it's just a sort of very untouched
wilderness by the sea a lot of old
Neolithic Bronze Age history here
sort of and a sort of authentic there is
right there's a history in the UK that
seeps through just to at least my raw
experience as I as I walk around places
and I'm very attached to that mystique
and there's something as well about
about being on the edge here you know
mmm it's slightly it's a fossa it's
further away from big cities it's still
absolutely attached to civilization but
there is you know there's a there's a
nice metaphoric analogy there to that to
the world of thought as well yeah you
know you can be out here walking the
fields surrounded as it so happens by a
fertile magic mushroom growing
growing territory so I've heard and you
don't know who from and and ya know it
is it is wonderful it is it seems like a
wonderful place to think I understand
really why you why you're here in in
some ways and it's on the edge of
Britain you know yeah a bit like some my
thought you know I'm sort of just
pushing pushing untouched boundaries
right well that's it right you are on
the edge but for for my part at least
it's an edge that I am very interested
in continuing to explore with you you've
definitely been a big influence on me
I've been following I noticed actually
on your website the other day on to
logistics that um it's on the website
philosophy you that's the domain that
that your first WordPress blog post
which was never actually posted but the
page is still there you could find it
somehow it's same with my bloody
workforce as well it bastards to
maintain aren't they but it says that it
was published at the end of 2013 so is
that when you put the website up around
there sounds about right
I remember well I found it I found it
very early at 2014 alright pretty early
on and part of that is because oh it
seems that you and I share a great many
interest from from philosophy very
broadly into psychedelics to authors
like Nietzsche yeah in in my case now
I'm a young and I know you've got a
summary of young on online so obviously
you've have spent some time yet I taught
a little bit of young up at College in
London yeah not too much there yeah but
also pan psychism as well and process
philosophy perhaps most acutely and you
well you know I have a few I I think I
deep down I have a few aims for for this
discussion and part of that is to get a
bit closer to how someone's philosophy
let's just call it how their pursue in
you know in caking on and wending their
way and trying to bring sets of ideas
together into some sort of whole that is
then relatable till to one's life in
some sense how that process is
fundamentally the why are you doing what
you do because it in it in a way for me
at least this this whole all of this
it's it's necessary
I mean I'm choosing to do it in in a
very real sense
but at the same time sitting here with
you right now is unnecessary it's a
necessary endeavor I've been you know
there is a certain questioning process
and and journey itself towards at the
very basic level trying to make sense of
things whatever we might mean by that
and and that's led you to entertain what
I consider to be a really cutting edge
interpretation of a way of viewing
reality itself from our very limited
human perspective that is in accord with
much of the great thinking of our past
yet at the same time is very
fundamentally opposed to what might be
considered philosophical orthodoxy as
per the academic institutions of our
time so perhaps you know giving you a
very broad Launchpad there we have view
the individual it was somehow found his
way to exploring these ideas and then
where that actually meets the
technicalities of how those views come
out looking on page so I don't know I
don't know well okay as well as I can
say this um we were speaking about when
we were at the lighthouse earlier we
were speaking about Nietzsche's world
power a nature of course reduces the
will to truth to the world power you
know knowledge of power spoken said but
I think like Whitehead and others there
is actually another drive for knowledge
you know separate somehow from power
even if it's detrimental to one's power
there is some kind of drive curiosity
which is somehow natural perhaps
probably not just to humans but anyway
I've certainly been afflicted for this
drive from them I suppose
started my father who was an artist
painter he was always interested in
philosophy and he had a number of
philosophy books and in our house I mean
one especially East and Eastern
philosophy that got me yeah that started
me probably and and I so I decided to
study philosophy I thought that was the
broadest most comprehensive
route to truth science would have been
second mmm-hmm but of course that
doesn't deal with certain things like
ethics and consciousness and so on at
least not very well why we should be
living at all right so it was you know
so I was seeing science as a method
rather than write knowledge really of it
of course meaning adds to knowledge but
anyway so I chose sedative philosophy
got into Nietzsche very early on and
that sort of
immediately changed my whole ethical
outlook you know upturned it really and
that's always stayed with me when
Nietzsche 18 I was too young got me too
young
yeah why does why does Nietzsche so is
so often referenced as the sledgehammer
which could happen to philosophers with
a hammer as he's right
why because I suppose ultimately it's
like every good philosopher should it
just hammers down your assumptions you
know the axioms that you never even
questioned so you know before Nietzsche
I was thinking about ethics and I
thought well how does one ground ethics
is it in compassion is it about quality
is it the universe or the other nature
makes one question why one even wants to
do that he takes a person back to the
history of the ethics of the West and
presents motives for why people purport
this kind of Morales here so just at the
very least a makes you question it you
know even if you disagree with it
it suddenly puts it all up in the air so
that changes you immediately and then
Nietzsche I mean I was came very
interested in a central tenet of his you
know the world's power later turn out of
his really although it's always
throughout his work but he expressly
talks about the will to power minutes
later notebooks and later works publish
works and my theory as I mentioned is
that I you believe that his theory of
the world's power is incomplete yes and
that's why the most interesting stuff is
in the notebooks rather than the
published works but you know in those
notebooks and in the published works he
talks about there was power having an
effect form rights and an affectation
yes sort of form of sentience going back
to shop and how somewhat and this is
really what then started me off thinking
about pants psychism you know the view
that mentality is in all things not just
an emergent property of brains and then
that was sort of substantiate it when I
looked at shopping our after nature in
Kent
he's the bridge between them and a
university also studied Bergson under
Keith Ansel Pearson who's also
Nietzschean that pushed it further and
then I realized that the sort of
culmination of all these thinkers
perhaps was from what I understood at
the time from secondary reading was
Alfred North Whitehead then you know
number of years ago I got into his work
which is the sort of most systematically
expressed form of Penn psychism there
really still today and that sort of
where I am now so I'm expressing my
ultimate goal philosophical goal
probably is to try to fuse this notion
of willpower from Nietzsche with
whiteheads process philosophy and his
pants are Kizza more what he calls
philosophy of organism and allowing that
to be informed by a new field which is
psychedelic philosophy yeah it's a
bringing so many difficult things
together and to bring them together with
psychedelics as well introduces so many
anomalies there's little more mysterious
I mean apart from psychedelics life
itself is perhaps the only thing more
mysterious that sits outside of it and
there's there's a lot to unpack in what
you said there especially as I hope that
this conversation is one that can be of
utility to people who aren't technically
versed in in many of the in many of the
theories we're talking about here but at
least for my for my part psychedelics
offer a remarkably different way of
relating to one's own being so it's a
radical phenomenological shift what's
interesting about being in just a
broadly referred to as a psychedelic
state is the sense of responsibility one
has for just maneuvering in the world
and the agency one has to take
responsibility for orienting through the
world amongst what might have been maybe
very benign occurrences before but but
though all of a sudden take on a greater
significance I mean certain elements of
the world can become much more salient
to you than they otherwise were before
but salient in a sense that has this
real effective nature to it that there's
a sense of responsibility for how you
need to negotiate
there's the psychedelic environment to
me is is oh it's it speaks to a
microcosm of the human endeavor itself
and it's funny because I was just saying
hey I should we should try and unpack
some of these ideas and not get too
esoteric here but but as the psychedelic
experience as being a microcosm of the
pattern formulation that perhaps we can
use to map onto how being itself is is
is formulated
I don't know if you could get what I'm
not going out there well what a breach
the mind is one way in which psychedelic
sentience well it has resonances with
Nietzsche in the sense that it opens up
your worldview immediately to different
perspectives so it's a I think even one
one dose one experience will change a
person most often has happened Asia air
I mean you know he didn't take
psychedelics but he had sex daily
experience in 1888 which worried about
he's much more sympathetic to the
afterlife after that one experience and
he was the sort of Richard Dawkins of
his age you know and in terms of I mean
in my experience yeah Nietzsche opened
up this these whole ethical questions
and which immediately relate to how one
lives one's life psychedelics suddenly
made me realize that there's so much
more to reality than I then I realized
you know because most people think that
psychedelic experiences just
kaleidoscopic colors something like this
you know this it's so much more right
especially interested in the
relationship between sexual experience
and certain philosophies ten-pound
psychism especially and something I
spoke about in Stockholm few weeks ago
was what was one connection that I that
I see is this that Charles Hart's Horne
who was a whitehead Ian philosopher
really he was very you know he was pants
are kissed he gave a lot of rational
arguments and I think that it's the most
plausible doctrine pound psychism it's
just that people aren't are not aware of
the arguments and that's why it's
generally considered slightly crazy in
the West also because of a Cartesian
legacy that makes people them think in a
completely different way but once you
see the reasons it's very hard to at the
very least to not take them seriously
and Hudson says one of the reasons that
people don't as well as what I said is
the what he calls the prosaic fallacy
which is the view that thought can only
be a thought that we have our everyday
prosaic dull consciousness were
relatively bill right if only he says
there were another method or another way
by which we could detain other forms of
experience this would make people more
sympathetic to pass psychism because we
couldn't we can't imagine what it's like
to be say a cell or a virus or whatever
so he sort of them remnants traits that
you know it's a pity that there's no
other way of attaining this form of
other forms of consciousness but of
course there it's you know yeah yes and
psychedelics certainly gives you vast
new array of mental forms of experience
so in itself that psychedelics perience
can add to not the the reasons for
parents autism but at least the sympathy
towards it and perhaps this is actually
what happened to William James because
he's in well known for taking nitrous
oxide ether and other certain other
substances but mainly nitrous oxide and
later on in life in a book called a
pluralistic universe he talks about
religious experiences even forming his
sympathy for affection Arian point of
view and Gustav Fechner wasn't well
known pants I kiss you see so I
certainly think that yeah psychedelics
can aid one's cognition of more radical
philosophies of mind and you know
whatever the truth is with regard to the
mind matter problem it's gonna have to
be radical whatever it is
so therefore experiencing radical forms
of consciousness is I think a very
legitimate way of the very least
realizing what's possible what needs to
be spoken about and that's that's the
new thing really now that I'm talking
about you know psychedelic philosophy
it's just a new field of inquiry within
the philosophy of mind and within
psychology neuroscience one and that's
why the conference's are generally
interdisciplinary for psychedelics
because um it's such a it's such an
novel form of experience that er people
don't know how to tackle it you know
right it seems to deal with I mean it it
doesn't seem like the psychedelic
experience itself could ever deal with
really anything but a huge dose of of
anomaly you know I think part of what
part of what gives it its effective
quality is the fact that you are in some
metaphorical sense and maybe not so
metaphorical further out into the domain
of the unknown at least
phenomenologically interestingly airs
article was called the undiscovered
country originally and they renamed it
to what I saw when I was dead but um yet
it's it's about map mapping the
territory as I say at the moment and
everyone's a pioneer well exactly so
mapping the territory and if it can be
mapped
if its territory now we're talking mean
I metaphorically here sort of when we're
talking about territory of course you
know and it might be the case that
whatever we map is merely the best we
can do at the present time and so what
we're mapping is in fact a well it's a
representation of sorts and it is true
enough for the time it's pragmatic in
that sense but then but but importantly
then and this is going to try to
introduce an idea that I was mentioning
to you earlier if we are engaged or to
engage in this in this process of
exploring and mapping and re vivifying
our current knowledge structures then
what becomes most important of all is
the structure of investigation and
communication that enables the continual
and the continuation of the mapping and
remapping so what then becomes important
is our commitment to the kind of
communicative Reformation that makes
possible the healthy adaptation of
knowledge structures and so but you know
there's a paragraph right at the end of
one of your essays in Numa nautics and
it's the essay on a cool down title I
think bugs and in psychedelic
consciousness if I'm not mistaken and
you finish like this you say in some the
psychedelic experience is not simply
abstract hallucination caused by
chemicals in the brain but rather the
defusing of the individual consciousness
into the larger reality and into
alternative modes of being it is the
ordinary everyday consciousness that is
the hallucination in the sense that it
is but a mere fractional practical
perspective of reality I think that's
very clear as you've written it there
but I wonder if you could unpack okay
well a lot of let's say either critics
or people who have no awareness of
psychedelic experience or psychedelia
generally they just immediately assume
that all of psychedelics perience is
hallucination you know and I'm not
doubting that some of it is but what the
person who hasn't study philosophy or
science doesn't realize is that everyday
consciousness of the world around us is
itself a type of hallucination in the
sense that it's only a small fragment
then based on our if
practicality of what is actually out
there so we're completely blind to
infrared - well most of the
electromagnetic spectrum
other than the colors we see and even
then we perceive it as a color and we
needn't do that there might be more to
it than that we act we so say you know
what Bergson's
argument and white heads and even
Nietzsche's is that we have evolved to
only perceive a small fragment of
reality because that's all that we need
for everyone I think this I know now in
in science as well everyone knows yes
everyone knows this but I think it's
still even though people know it I don't
think it's sort of really trickled down
into their sort of general awareness
that you know the table we see in front
of us is is actually much more than that
not that that's an illusion but rather
that it's only a small fragment so
everything we see is a hallucination in
that sense in that fragmented practical
sense yes
so once we've accepted that yet
everything we see is not you know
absolutely sufficiently real a real
representation of what is out there then
one realizes that ok so if this is a
hallucination
and if psychedelia is a hallucination
then what is their relationship are they
both is one a sort of higher level
hallucination or are there aspects of
psychedelia which actually as it were
break down the hallucination of everyday
reality so this is nothing new I mean
Aldous Huxley wrote about it based on
Burke's on that as it happens in the
doors perception but the view is that a
lot of the stuff out there which is
usually excluded from view taken care of
by what Wyatt calls negative reactions
is then allowed in as it were through
through psychedelics with eyes open at
least using valve either yeah what
hugsley calls a reducing valve
introduced via CD broad ultimately from
Bergson and I've got a lot of sympathy
for that I mean for example when you
look at a leaf on psilocybin you
immediately become aware well in certain
cases you one can become aware of more
tones of color more beauty you know and
more intricacies generally and the
heightened emotional perception of the
being itself of the of the plant itself
and that's not you know to say that's a
hallucination of the
relief I think is wrong I think it's
rather no a greater understanding of the
totality of that leaf and the eat it's
not a total understanding but yet
there's more when my mind goes here is
towards the I think we need to flesh out
really what someone like Berks one means
by the notion of duration and intuition
being that which we use essentially to
that's what binds us into the quality of
duration itself duration being distinct
from time as it's understood in physics
so perhaps you could flesh out okay
those notions for us well so yeah
Bergson distinguishes duration from time
inverted commas timers spatialized
duration in other words a representation
of time as well senator is a pictorial
representation and fixed picture of the
real flow of experience that we have the
real flow of experience is duration is
entering into the you know the self the
sort of the continual movement of things
as we perceive them to represent that
duration which is not spatial temporal
and qualitative to represent her for
models so to create technology and to
predict the future we create a timeline
you know with t1 t2 t3 instants of time
an instant of time is not a real thing
it's just our way of firm as it were
compartmentalizing reality actually away
from the real of the duration precisely
and as a result we misunderstand reality
when we talk of it purely as something
that moves forward along a line so what
he calls a rhythm of duration is related
pants psychism an interesting way so in
physics when we have a time line the
speed of time is irrelevant you know so
from you know 2017 is 2018 that one year
a human a certain human will experience
that duration as a certain duration and
a real duration whereas perhaps a snail
or a fly will experience it as a much
longer duration but of course in terms
of a pictorial line it's the same but in
reality
see the duration is totally distinct and
there's a really interesting argument
that Bergson makes which can be
developed I plan to later on which is
this that there isn't but there's no
absolute speed of time we all experience
time difference and experience time as
faster or slower depending on mood and
environments like unicycle II right
excited and that's where that comes in
as well of course but there's no
absolute speed of time so that means
that even a million years in theory
could be experienced as what we would
consider one second or vice-versa a
second isn't really as a terrifying one
is it and ultimately time itself
if you stretch that duration to infinity
time itself does not move there is no
time without consciousness so but then
you think if you believe that
consciousness emerged at one point in
time let's say you know two billion
years ago something like this or or less
you know then how do you explain then
that the motion of time before then that
couldn't have been without consciousness
according to this theory because there's
no absolute speed of time which
therefore implies that consciousness
must have a or sentience rather must
have existed all the way throughout
because otherwise we wouldn't have
reached the stage we are now so that's a
quite esoteric argument four-pound
psychism but it's a fascinating one
absolutely so there's a million things
to say I mean one idea that I'm
particularly taken by is let's say that
if if in order to preserve in our
communication what is qualitatively most
real this sort of relation we have to
duration we become our action our
embodiment of ideas our action in the
world is is tied up with the progression
and the qualitative nature of that
duration and in some sense it places a
irrelevance to our very action right
really at the center of of the picture
in a way that is in a way that just
isn't there at all on on the materialist
and certainly the epiphenomena listview
where consciousness is sort of just like
a and an ad on a byproduct that maybe
you know may as well be there or not it
has no actual causal relation the steam
from a steam tree
Huxley Thomas accessing it right and so
if if our actual action and is is
becomes involved there's some things I
need to add to this to make this as
clear as it as it needs to be but but
where I'm trying to move the
conversation towards and perhaps you can
help me out here given what we spoke
about the lighthouse and before is the
idea that that Carl Jung explored in in
in great depth as did annoy Minh has now
does Jordan Peterson to a an absolutely
unpredictable degree of we can say
popularity this sort of idea is is right
at the heart of his thinking in some
fundamental sense and and that is that
the the hero's journey the exploration
out into the unknown and the return with
said information after a conquest of a
dragon or what have you just to stay in
a very fairy tale type metaphor talking
about this idea it's the exploration out
and the return back into the structure
constitutes the essential process of
knowledge adaptation and updating what
might now be referenced as a previously
fixed structure okay so so if we refer
to what we think about the world
empirically or descriptively using the
books only on terms we just have here we
have a system of sort of fixed
representations in some sense but in
order to update them in a very real
sense we have to engage with the unknown
of the world itself and some at some
brutally experiential level yes in order
to save what is in a sense most most
real but it but it's a strange thing to
tie these worlds together because on the
one hand we have a you know a really
mythological way in a very psychological
way of talking and on another we have a
what hopes to be a very analytic way of
at the end of the day of talking about
metaphysics hmm so but but did you see
the links between these ways of thinking
that that I do okay yeah I mean my my
knowledge of Union psychologies is not
deep but the hero's journey
I mean hero's journey today is
psychedelic experience you know like we
were saying uncharted territory the
undiscovered country of course that
means death and Shakespeare but
certainly going there
risky psychologically if not
physiologically but certainly
psychologically risky and I don't
recommend it to every person that reason
but I think there's so much to gain
there I mean at the very very least new
phenomenological concepts and tools
perhaps but of course you have to make
the journey come back try to analyze it
in that way and then I think we can
certainly add on to the philosophy of
mind completely at the moment philosophy
of mind very restricted to prosaic
sentience that's its you know which is
only the smallest well not the smallest
but it's very interesting but it's a
small element of what can be experienced
I mean even the classification of
phenomenology into its concepts and
percepts and things like that can all be
questioned very much so there's a whole
as I say new land out there to explore -
yep - a journey - and back I think that
also am in terms of in terms of basic
science you know the neural correlates
of consciousness so you know can learn a
lot from it david nutt says you know if
you want to understand consciousness
you've got to look at psychedelics also
yeah in terms of not only in terms of
you know business shaft in a general
knowledge for people but in terms of
your own self you know Nietzsche said
the knowledge acquired or the experience
acquired in dreams adds to the richness
of one's life as much as thus everyday
life right and if you consider
psychedelic experience as a sort of you
know incredible dream really yeah then
of course you know the richness of your
life is you know immeasurably heightened
so people who don't do psychedelics
really you know keeping their quality of
their life low with the qualification
like I said that it's not for everyone
because some people are quite happy like
that you know some people are quite
happy with everyday reality routine
practicality or not but but for
knowledge seekers you know one has to
take the risk one has to make that
journey yeah oh absolutely
might be worth saying that that it seems
to me that the the effective meaning
associated with psychedelic
consciousness draws from the same
substrate in some sense that that dreams
do that that the real effective you have
the affective meaning that you and that
you encounter that you
that agitates you that that imbues you
that that you relate to as though it's
part of who you are in some sense and in
these moments of going through the
experience draws from the same
imaginative qualifier on the use of
imaginative there as dreams to now Union
interpretations of dreams lead to
concepts like archetypes an archetype
here being some fundamental pattern of
representation that characterizes if we
bring in Burke Sonya in terms which you
doesn't that characterizes something
characterizes qualitative action as it
takes place in in duration now yeah
these are two technical terms to use but
um so okay so do the one thing I just
before you continue is very interesting
I think him to compare
phenomenologically the difference
between although they have this shared
base no doubt it's very interesting to
still distinguish dream that the average
imeem there are so many different types
of dreams and there are so many
different types of psychedelic
experience but to generalize yeah I
think you can it's interesting to
compare dreams to psychedelic experience
to hypnagogic hallucinations and perhaps
other other similar forms of
consciousness meditation perhaps
something like this
and see how they do differ it seems to
me like one not always but generally
dreams have a narrative you know you are
in them and you walk along and you do
something even if you turn into a lorry
or whatever yeah it's still somewhat
narrative but in conscious distinction I
hope my going to loosen ations and
psychedelic spirits generally speaking
again often don't have that narrative in
fact you even you know famously you lose
yourself another word well well not you
because that's saying you're still there
but the self is lost or fragmented so
becomes one with everything the ego
selfie oh my okay yeah yeah
so although dreams are somewhat similar
they are you know they do different very
interesting ways right yeah so so it may
be the case that the narrative the
structural narrative of someone
undergoing a psychedelic experience is
lost to that person at the time
certainly that they don't have a
cohesive representation of what it is at
the time although it's often the case I
think that much of what helps people
process what they've been through is
there
after the fact you then go about
ascribing some sort of narrative or
description of it yeah I mean you always
say that I then experience this and then
I saw this and that I had it better of
course that's retrospective as you say
certainly the tying together is
retrospective however that effective
meaning that's encountered that then
later is reflected on in order to tie
together very well may still draw on the
same well sources of meaning it may be
the case that what you happen to notice
about the location of objects in a room
or perhaps the particular activity that
two people are doing in front of you
perhaps one of them is slightly
frustrated at the other person and
there's an a sort of aggressive mode of
communication between them and and this
under the psychedelic experience perhaps
fragments apart how secure you feel in
the social environment might make you
think of just how tentative and
temperamental societal relations can be
and and then maybe starts to have you
dissociate your security sort of sort of
fragments and and all of a sudden you
have here you might recognize in front
of you a certain warring perhaps of of a
masculine and feminine element and all
of a sudden the people arguing in front
of you take on much more meaning than
just the than just a Dan and Mary that
were having a chat but now they might in
some sense be standing for the two
pillars of the two principles that hold
society together and that we use as
representations to sort of buttress us
in the world right from the beginning of
right from the beginning of life and so
things can take on these narrative old
tropes that you wouldn't expect someone
to be able to put together at the time
if they hadn't been living with and
working with such archetypes for a long
period of time and even then I believe
in psychedelics they're so powerful that
the possibility always remains there for
them to completely subsume you and
submerge whatever you can pull together
as coherent in the moment and you are
truly out in the unknown so it doesn't
surprise me that such a fragmented
coherence is part of the psychedelic
experience but to the extent that we
engaged meaningfully in the world
at all it seems to be the case that we
can't escape how we are involved with it
how life is involved mmm life seems to
have if nothing else an interest in
keeping itself around preserving itself
and also complexify in itself it seems
and my point might be whether the post
hoc analysis just puts together the
narrative or not the themes that it
draws on seem still to appear and indeed
constitute what people speak of is so
relevant and interesting in their
psychedelic experiences so two things
really there the notion of the self that
runs through there first of all although
you may not feel that you are you know a
self mm-hmm and again you is not the
word not the right word I should say the
notion that itself is not there may be
felt by whom but of course if it's
remembered there is that unifying factor
isn't it mm-hm and that's perhaps
something analogous to what camp calls
pure a perception it's what you have to
assume is that although you can never
perceive it directly as you can with a
psychological self empirical a
perception there must be something
underneath which unifies these memories
of what happens even when you are not
yourself as it were but interestingly
that of course there could be many cycle
experiences which are never remembered
it's theoretically possible that their
immense what would otherwise be
life-changing conscious experiences
which are completely lost right how does
one tell you know this is there's an
interesting question so but maybe
everything is somewhere retained somehow
with regard to archetypes again
something I really my field but
certainly I've had very typically a
typical visions or experiences and
psychedelia such as Satan becoming Satan
right feeling that being told that
Christianity is correct since giant
cliff with this cross cracking through
it sort of in my face saying believe
this you and I mentioned before
Nietzsche's Jung's essay on wrote on
which brings in Nietzsche and Jung's
view is that really Nietzsche should
have called Dionysus his main God at
least at the beginning and end of his
work well done because that's what it
really is but he didn't because of his
greed
affections vogner and so on but you know
I'm probably sympathetic to such an
archetype you know darkness of course
was the god of intoxication so that
brings us full circle but if he is where
town than that of course also represents
the great warrior king which again from
a Nietzschean point of view I've got
sympathy for terms of a sort of
romanticism of the past especially my
Scandinavian past there's a lot to
unpack there I mean that I think that
the the thing that calls me towards
being more and more interested in
mythological representations of meaning
fundamentally was that an image as it
were can contain what an image can
convey may take several pages to convey
and maybe you still can't even in that
right yeah I find that I have a dream
log and just conveying the most basic
sense of a dream sometimes can take
reams of pages one meaning one one image
yeah
and so what images seem to have allowed
allowed us to do is to hold
contradictory elements in them in some
sense and there is a strange in the
dissociation of the ego there is a
strange because when people talk about
ego dissolution they mean this they I
think they mean something like the
annihilation of your ordinary way of
relating to being moment to moment and
perhaps the coherence of that moment to
moment experience basically what Kant
calls empirical absorption right okay
the psychological self yeah but as we've
discussed that there remains a and a
nexus or a node of experience there that
persists and and I think you know for
memory sake right and I call that
something like the Explorer it's just a
metaphorical word but it there is this
persistence yes and so okay we can be
destroyed about remain
I mean younger talks about this
destruction as a temporary death so his
belief it it seemed at least from his
correspondence with Albert Hoffman
creative LST was that the psychedelic
experience this is what happens to you
when you die this is similar to what err
thought as well or how they interpreted
their experience this is complete
fragmentation of the individual self but
yet something remains and the
interesting thing is could that be a
taste of the afterlife well again it
when we talk about metaphysics we can
never speak about proof
as proof only exists in mathematics
logic and then you can question that
relationship to reality anyway even in
science you can't really get proof you
can only get it seems if you follow
popper anyway a proof of falsification
so there's a theory out there we never
really know it's true but we at least
can hold out the possibility that it
will be disproved mmm
but with metaphysics I mean I remember
in Sweden actually people saying yeah
but you can't prove prove this stuff but
yeah if you if you stick to proof you're
stuck to solipsism you can only prove
that you yourself exists it seems and
that's it so we talked about inference
to the best explanation or analogy or
whatever and I'm agnostic here about the
afterlife but certainly it's an
interesting idea that yes Aikido
experienced us offer you this taste of
death generally quite exciting unless
you have a bad trip and then it's
actually quite horrifying and and that's
what what I mean when I talk about
psychedelics being psychologically
damaging I mean if you were religiously
minded if you're brought up that way and
then you have this horrific experience
and psilocybin of a hell something
hellish you know then that then you're
not going to look forward to your death
yeah I mean even even less so than
normal right but of course then you can
look at the Tibetan Book of the Dead or
whatever and realize this is the phase I
mean even in the Eleusinian mysteries in
ancient Greece you know the first phase
was horrific Cora terror and then
eventually the great Elysian Fields you
know of their heaven that was a whole
point of you know the the sort of annual
alludes Indian mysteries in ancient
Greece she knows it was to prepare one
for death and that's what you know Plato
said and other great thinkers so yeah so
I mean okay so if there's survival after
death then of course it isn't on the
individual level but psychedelics
perhaps are for that example of existing
without you know this empirical a
perception as our
[Music]
if you're still with me thanks for
listening part 2 will be online next
week where we round out this discussion
of death the move to discuss the extent
to which psychedelic experience can
reveal and authentic connections and
metaphysical purpose so when it will be
released you can like the Facebook page
follow me on Twitter or subscribe
anywhere iTunes stitcher tuned in using
the RSS feed any of your podcast apps
should be on there all good
[Music]
you
[Music]