welcome to the future thinkers podcast
episode number 42 today on the show we
have Daniel SH Martin Berger the
co-founder and director of research and
development for neuro hacker collective
which is a smart drug company with a
vision of advanced human optimisation
Daniels past work involved being a Dean
for a college of mind-body medicine and
running a think-tank that focused on
developing complex system solutions to
environmental and societal issues we
already interviewed Daniel on our
podcast once before where he talked
about complex global systems and you can
listen to that episode by going to
future thinkers org slash 36 but today
our topic is neuro hacking or the
voluntary altering of your own brain
function to optimize for performance
well-being or a number of other factors
and we recently got our hands on qualia
which is a newer enhancer or a smart
drug stack from neuro hacker collective
which Daniel is the co-founder of we've
tried a few other smart drugs before
like modafinil for example but qualia
seems to be quite different from the
others for example my experience of
Madeleine was that it made me just
dislike people in general although it
made me extremely focused but qualia
didn't have any of those side effects
for me it gave me a sense of emotional
well-being and a general sense of
balance as well as focus which was quite
interesting the term for this is broad
spectrum cognitive enhancement which
means that it doesn't just improve one
quality of your functioning but multiple
qualities at the same time qualia
specifically focuses on three areas of
enhancement cognitive psycho affective
and physiological cognitive area
includes things like intelligence and
creativity psycho effective area
includes increasing confidence willpower
and empathy and physiological area
includes higher levels of energy
awareness and responsiveness qualia has
also been designed with an ethical
mindset instead of depleting or
overriding your brains natural function
like some other smart drugs it works to
support and enhance without creating
dependency there are over 40 active
ingredients in qualia and it's all
transparent you can check all of
on their website and there's 40 plus
years of international research on
neurotropic stack formulation behind
these ingredients if you're interested
in learning more about qualia go to
future thinkers org slash brain hack one
word and finally before we get in the
show I just want to give a quick thank
you to our patrons and donors Josh
Alfred Lauren and Melanie thank you guys
for supporting the show we love you to
check out the show notes from this
episode go to future thinkers org slash
42 and the second half of this interview
will be at future thinkers org slash 43
once it's live and to listen to our
first interview with Daniel go to future
thinkers org slash 36 enjoy the show
welcome to future thinkers org a podcast
about the evolution of technology
society and consciousness I'm Mai
Gilliland and I'm UV Ivanova to get
notified of new podcasts and videos go
to future thinkers org and subscribe to
our mailing list you can also find us on
iTunes stitcher and you tube if you like
what we do and you want to help us make
more podcasts and videos give us a like
or review share it with your friends and
consider becoming a patron go to
patreon.com/crashcourse on our org slash
bap last but not least if you want to
get access to more content hidden
episodes or if you just want to chat
with us in previous guests then check
out our community at community future
thinkers org Daniel welcome to the show
it's good to have you own again I'm
happy to be on again so your last
episodes were quite popular but we
talked about quite a different set of
subjects and today we'd like to talk
with you about neuro hacking so maybe
can you give us like a brief
introduction to what neuro hacking is
and why we should be doing it if we
should be doing it yeah so neuro hacking
is a broad and kind of ambiguous term
related to bio hacking and consciousness
hacking generally we can think of it as
the application of any tools or
technologies or processes to modulate
augment upgrade some aspect of
psychological neurological function and
so we could think of ancient neural
hacking technologies being
meditation and sweat lodges and
psychedelics and dancing around the
campfire to get into trance-like states
and etc and obviously with advances in
neuroscience and neuro technology we've
got Q EEG neurofeedback we've got
transcranial stimulation technologies
we've got much more advanced microbiome
ik genomic you know biochemical
technologies so we can think of neuro
hacking as how do we optimize the mind
brain interface towards any positive
purpose utilizing whatever tools best
serve that particular purpose I love how
you say mind brain interface as if there
are very separate things well the reason
that we're saying mind brain interface
together is because if you want to run
the analogy of mind stuff as kind of
like software and brain stuff is kind of
like hardware you realize that the
distinction the clear distinction in
computers between software and hardware
we don't have such a clear distinction
and the human organism that any change
in thought has a physical change in the
brain that's happening any physical
change in the brain has some change in
thinking emotion experience etc and so
they are dynamically Co inter affecting
each other all the time
so I suppose a lot of the thinking that
we've done about consciousness has come
from well it's come from a lot of
different perspectives but the one that
we land on quite often is the
perspective from Hinduism and Buddhism
which is you are not the mind and the
consciousness is not exactly localized
in physical material in the brain so do
you have much to say from that
perspective before we dive deeper into
neuro hacking yeah so we get right into
what's what's famously known in
neuroscience as the hard problem of
neuroscience how does consciousness and
brain right or in general consciousness
and physics how do they what are they
both and how do they relate and is there
causal interaction in both directions
this is the hard problem of neuroscience
but before that this was you know the
kind of hard problem with the mind brain
problem where the
the dualism challenge that all
philosophic systems faced is it seems
like there is third-person stuff right
that we can all independently measure in
Sciences the method of knowing the third
person reality we'll think of as third
person or objective reality we can all
measure it we can corroborate it and if
we're going to you know make hypotheses
about interactional dynamics we'll be
able to you know make predictions etc
and third person stuff has weight and
position and charge and length and spin
and those kinds of properties
first-person stuff doesn't have any of
those right it has emotion and feeling
and longing and impulse and it can't be
corroborated by anybody else at all
right like you are having a first-person
experience as we're talking and I can
empathetically imagine to feel into what
your experience is like but that is
different than actually having the
first-person access to it that you do so
there both of these realities exist has
been acknowledged and there are
philosophic systems that don't think
that they're both real right you have
what are called idealism systems that
say consciousness is fundamentally real
because it's the only thing we can know
I can know that I'm having an experience
but I can't know that what I'm
experiencing about the world even
through my scientific measurements is
true because I could just be a crazy
person right this could all be a dream
it could all be the matrix and it could
just be you know contours within
consciousness but I don't I only have
first-person experience first-person
access to my experience of stuff not the
stuff itself and so in those models
what's fundamentally reals consciousness
and the rest of universe right
third-person self is either not real at
all Maya or it's an epiphenomena of
consciousness mind creates reality
you've got the other side and says which
fundamentally real is physical stuff
material stuff physical stuff happened
with the Big Bang interactions occur
that lead to complexity emergent
properties have enough complexity and
somewhere around biology or maybe
nervous systems consciousness is an
emergent property but what
fundamentally real is physical stuff and
then consciousness is either just not
real at all
it's called radical diminutive ism so
Dan Dennett and others kind of proposed
that it's kind of like an illusion or
consciousness is real but it's an
epiphenomena of complex neural networks
right radical emergentism so you've got
different philosophic systems that don't
see both of those has fundamentally real
things or reduce them to the domain that
seems more role to them or they're stuck
with all right these both seem real and
they seem uncommon surrett called
dualism or attempts to try and reconcile
them more deeply and so when you're
living your life when your body is
touched interacted with sensation
happens this is physical right it's
being mediated by via biology and
physics and yet you have a conscious
experience so it seems like physics can
affect consciousness there's a causal
movement but you also experience
yourself having some choice and again we
get deep into not just the topic of
consciousness with the topic of will and
volition and if your choice is real and
then affects your hand moving it would
seem that consciousness has some effect
on physics and there for every branch
where you say well what about that and
each of these questions each of these
things I've said and the questions that
come up there is a whole branch of
philosophy that goes down is there
really free will or not is it compatible
with the deterministic universe or not
is universe deterministic etc but most
of what we're gonna talk about today
does not require these deep existential
issues being solved to say that we do
know empirically both first-person and
third-person the things that we can do
with our subjective experience so
mindfulness meditation introspection etc
can actively affect the brain and affect
the brain in ways that affect the minds
predispositions and things that we can
do to the body ie changing its
biochemistry changing its microbiota
exercising differently change cognitive
and emotional right mental and and the
experience
of the conscious creature and you can
abstract and say well okay so you're
saying the mind thinking feeling stuff
is different than the body is
consciousness different than that as the
as the non-dual witness imagem candidate
in new buddhist philosophy so maybe
there is consciousness as a field effect
it is then interacting with this
self-organizing system fascinating
questions and if you wanted to do a show
where we just dive into them existential
questions at depth that behaves I think
that's the plan for the next one
actually but yeah you bring up non non
duality and that's exactly what I was
going to say just now do you approach
newer hacking from a non-dualistic
perspective where it's both ascending
and descending in terms that Ken Wilber
uses yeah so when Ken talks about the
ascending pass he's talking about the
transcendent direction and the
descending paths the eminent direction
right so the transcendent spiritual
processes are around in some way having
consciousness leave body mind etc and go
into higher states of consciousness etc
the descending pass around taking
universal consciousness and embodying it
more fully and if you just want to talk
about it very simply in terms of just
having expanded states of awareness and
then being able to integrate those
expanded states as integrated stages yes
that's a valuable way to think about it
cool so why don't we move into the
actual subject of neuro hacking you
talked about the different tools that we
can use what are some of the currently
available tools for neuro hacking well
so there's a lot of different goals
right and so if someone's wanting to
decrease anxiety or brighten their mood
or increase their cognitive function or
have altered kind of you know
psychedelic numinous states or improve
their sleep quality or each of these
goals are gonna have different tools
that are more appropriate and then each
of the goals are going to have different
tools that are different depending up on
the person and what the person
she has going on they are specific
biochemistry genomics etc so I'll speak
broadly about categories of tools that
are currently available and then we can
get into applications more so think
about first affecting the brain and body
and this is another important
distinction so we look at the
intersection between the mind and brain
but it's not just mind and brain it's
your conscious experience in your body
as a whole and then we could say well
it's actually the mind brain body
environment complex because the
environment and the body are
intersecting each other inexorably in
real time so these are embedded complex
systems but let's just talk about the
topic of embodied consciousness and
conscious experience that is mediated
beyond just the nervous system in the
physiology you know the first example
that I think people are getting pretty
properly aware of is the gut brain axis
and the gut brain axis is mediated by
via a number of things you've got the
enteric nervous system which is a whole
branch of peripheral nervous system in
the intestines where inflammation in the
intestines can cause imbalance between
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system can cause more inflammation etc
but you've also got the microbiome
digesting food and actually many of our
nutrients are metabolic byproducts of
the microbiota and obviously we evolved
with our microbiome over so many
generations before we had chlorinated
water and antibiotics and refined sugar
diets and so the human genome doesn't
actually code everything necessary to
make a human the genome encodes a bunch
of stuff but we got a genome and a
microbiome from our parents and the
babies microbiome comes some in utero
some from the vaginal flora some from
you know breastfeeding but if we damage
that a whole bunch of functions
necessary to make an optimum human can
be damaged so specifically regarding
nervous system
some of the main neurotransmitters like
gaba dopamine serotonin are primarily
produced via flora in the
and so each of those three I just
mentioned somewhere between 30 to 80
percent of those neurotransmitters are
actually produced in the gut and that
you know moved to the brain if you think
about losing 30 to 80 percent of your
serotonin or GABA or dopamine that
that's you know psychopathology right
that's that's a messed up brain so then
you start looking at well how many
people are eating food that is feeding
some microbes more than others and
changing the gut microbiome or have some
GI disturbance or and so it's important
that if we helped the microbiome of
someone's gut that's a neuro hack right
we can be changing their brain chemistry
the most critical kinds of signaling
chemicals by changing the bacteria in
their gut the same is true if we want to
look at say pain anywhere in the body
pain can create inflammation that can
cross the blood-brain barrier and cause
neural inflammation and creates
depression and cognitive issues exercise
certain types of exercise can actually
affect genetic transcription and change
endogenous biochemical patterns in the
brain and so you know we'll talk about
technologies to affect the brain and
nervous system directly but some of them
are technologies to affect the
environment that the brain and nervous
system lives in which is first order of
the body right so tools let's think
about biochemical tools so first line of
biochemical tools is things that you can
put in your mouth right so we're talking
about vitamins and supplements and herbs
and drugs etc so you've got anxiety
biochemistry things that can decrease
anxiety you've got things that can help
with sleep you've got things that can
help with cognition all all the
nootropics and smart drugs and then you
know you've got things that can create
experiences that might not be where you
want to live all the time but are
meaningful state experiences so let's
take psychedelics and say are we
optimizing the physiology by taking a
psychedelic or are we oughta menteng it
moving it into a specific range of
function that we might know how to live
in all the time but that has very
meaningful positive effects lastingly if
done properly so you've got you just
about all the biochemical stuff right
now then you've got biochemical stuff
that could be injected could go
intranasally there's a lot of different
delivery methods for biochemical
technologies for neural hacking you've
got the biological technologies which
like we were mentioning you know
affecting the microbiome of the gut but
not just a microbiome of the gut
microbiome of all of the mucosa systems
the body it's pretty common for people
to have infections in their mouth
subclinical dental infections or
subclinical nasal infections they're
actually releasing bio toxins that
affect the brain and so they are the
boundary between good and Agreda
functional medicine and neuro hacking
right that kind of blurs we've got
genomic therapies we can think about for
neuro hacking so you know we're at the
edge of starting to think about CRISPR
and looking at do people with higher IQs
do people that are happier more
depressed have different genomic
patterns and can we actually do gene
doping splicing etc to affect that and
even before looking at it at a genomic
level we look at a genetic expression
level can we turn on or off or modulate
certain gene expressions and there's a
bunch of things that do that and then to
the degree that we know someone has say
a bunch of mutations on their mao
branches or their comt branches that
code for certain neurotransmitter
predispositions can we at least just do
nutrigenomics right provide different
nutrients for them to bypass where they
have new genomic deficiencies you've got
so many fun technologies you've got
biofeedback biofeedback and specifically
neurofeedback EEG neurofeedback which
can provide input about the brain to the
brain that it doesn't normally get that
teaches it how to regulate much more
profoundly and quickly in many areas
we've got all the transcranial
technologies so we can stimulate the
brain with transcranial lasers
transcranial direct current or
alternating current transcranial magnets
or ultrasound ultrasound s and
fascinating studies and early studies in
curing Alzheimer's right now
TMS has had some great work in
depression and
some of the tDCS has been used for Hyper
clocking the prefrontal cortex so
there's a bunch of fun things in there
the transcranial laser is low-level
laser not just transcranial but
sometimes I'll go up your nose
intranasal lasers can increase ATP
production in the neurons so increase
mitochondrial output that's a good
example if you're increasing ATP output
you're not making the system more moved
in a stimulatory direction right you're
not affecting stimulating
neurotransmitters or neural hormones
you're also not doing neuro inhibitory
ones you're just increasing the cell
energy for it to do whatever it wants to
do better which is kind of like a
younger brain interesting there's a
bunch more but you can give me more
questions otherwise I'll keep going so
you brought up the gut brain is there a
feedback mechanism that you can train
yourself to pay attention to so that you
have better insight or thinking sort of
informed by the gut so we could take
this a couple different ways we could
say that we might be actually looking at
the information processing of the
enteric nervous system right there is
this gut brain got nervous system that
it provides a different kind of input or
feedback just like there's a bunch of
neurons in the heart and we could talk
about the heart as an information
processing system you know or the
neurons in it at least that might be
true I don't think we know enough to
know for sure
we can also though just talk about the
benefit of tuning in two different
perspectives and being able to get
different information so let me give you
a totally different example Napoleon
Hills famous book Think and Grow Rich
mm-hmm so he said that one of his
favorite practices that he developed in
there was he had this council of
invisible advisors and his invisible
advisors were he thought about who he
wanted to become and the qualities that
mattered most and he thought about
people that really represented embodying
that quality well and so maybe he didn't
want to become Genghis Khan you know
holistically but there was some aspect
of Kurds that he wanted Genghis Khan's
inside for and so he had you know he had
his list
Lincoln DaVinci Ford whoever I don't
remember whose exact list was but he
studied those people well enough that he
could have some real sense of their
personalities and then he would convene
seeing them all at a council table with
his eyes closed in a kind of meditative
state and then he would bring life
issues to them and ask for their
feedback and go around and have Lincoln
talk right then have Napoleon talk and
one of the things that he found was that
when he was asking for Gandhi's input he
got insight that he would have never got
just journaling his own thoughts and he
said all right so is it because I am
channeling Gandhi or is it simply
because I'm looking at the universe
through a different lens that I wouldn't
normally using my own brain and you know
he said it let's assume that it's the
latter but it really doesn't matter at
all the net result is profound valuable
useful empirically useful insights came
from looking at the world through those
lenses you can do the same thing with
parts of your body and it's actually a
really meaningful part of somatic
psychology so you can tune in to your
gut you can tune in to say you want to
use the chakra system right and you tune
into your solar plexus or your heart
chakra your throat chakra
does it matter if they're really chakras
no it doesn't matter at all does it
matter if the chakras correlate to nerve
plexus or the endocrine glands or if
their nonsense is you're just tuning in
to this part of your body and saying
what does it want to tell me what does
it think what is it you know want me to
know and some information comes and then
you step back in your normal state of
consciousness and look at that
might you be able to gain meaningful
insights from it definitely yeah I think
that's a really good way of looking at
it because some people you know if
they're not used to or if they don't
believe that you know if Shockers exist
they might just refuse to use the
technique but actually the way you put
it you can totally just use the
technique without having any kind of
belief about it hmm does this work yes
it does does it not work okay well maybe
I can try something else and you know it
doesn't have to just be chakras it's
just an example you could just take an
area
of your body that's hurting and tune in
and say what is this heart want me to
know maybe you don't get anything but
then you just kind of feel the pain and
you or the tension or whatever it is and
you say alright if this pain could talk
what would it say and you see what comes
up
it's interesting how often that ends up
being insightful and when we talk about
the mind brain interface or the mind
body and face there are a tremendous
number of places where the top-down
regulatory system has huge effects on
all the other systems and so we're
specifically emotions psychology end up
affecting physiology you think about why
does a placebo ever make anything better
for anybody right like it doesn't even
make sense why a placebo like why isn't
the body already healing at its optimal
capacity as it is since it would be
genetically programmed to do so and it
is already healing at its optimal
capacity and taking the sugar pill isn't
interesting and it's not even the belief
that's interesting it's when someone is
in say someone has a disease state
they're anxious about it and that
anxious is mediated by cortisol and
epinephrine and etc and so their
cortisol is taking the precursor hormone
pregnenolone and shunting it into
cortisol in the adrenals which means
less of its going to DHEA so the
cortisol DHEA ratio gets higher well
that ends up affecting everything from
genetic transcription to lean muscle
mass to bone density to so many things
so then when the person believes they're
going to get well and they feel better
and their stress drops and their
parasympathetic nervous system can kick
on they're sympathetic nervous system
chills out and their cortisol DHEA ratio
moves in the right direction
the actual reparative mechanisms of
physiology are more available to them
and so their body is healing as best as
it can in the stress State and in a non
stress State that can actually heal
better right now one of the interesting
things is it's placebo is not the only
thing that can do that you look at work
like Norman Cousins were
where he just watched comedy because he
thought he was dying of cancer and his
cancer got better not because he
believed he was gonna get better but
because he was not stressed out and he
was happy for the first time and ended
up being that stress was meaningful to
you know the process of pathology that
was going on for him and so this doesn't
mean that it's the only thing or that it
will always be affecting sometimes
placebo just affects how you sense
something but not the underlying
pathophysiology but it's a part of it so
when you tune into pain in the body for
instance or tension in the body is it
possible that there is some
psychological that's happening there
where you can gain insights Austin are
there other ways of affecting cortisol
in your body that are meaningful in the
long term other than this kind of
observing your body and releasing it
consciously oh yeah so this is like the
first place that functional medicine
doctors and naturopathic doctors talk to
people which is understanding how the
HPA axis works and that the
dysregulation and the HPA axis usually
starts at the a at the adrenal side and
that roughly you can say the sympathetic
nervous system innervates the adrenal
cortex and the primary hormone there's
many coming from that processes cortisol
and the parasympathetic nervous system
innervates the adrenal medulla and there
are again many hormones that are coming
out but the primary one is DHEA so the
ratio of cortisol to DHA as hormones in
the endocrine system in the blood
representing kind of systemic effects is
roughly equivalent to the sympathetic
parasympathetic ratio of the system as a
whole and you know related to chronic
stress so in early phases of chronic
stress cortisol goes up and the
precursor the cortisol in the brain and
ACTH goes up after that's been the case
for a little while DHEA starts to go
down because cortisol and DHEA are both
made from the same precursor hormone
called pregnenolone and it's a rate
limited hormone there's a finite amount
of it after a while if
someone stays in chronic stress cortisol
starts to drop too simply because the
adrenal glands are fatigued and now DHA
is way lower so you can see people in
high or low cortisol adrenal stress
states depending upon how long they are
in that pathology but so so you can you
can give someone bioidentical hormones
or things that support hormones to get
them in the right range quickly and make
the person feel better so say you do a
blood or a salivary hormone lab to look
at adrenals you can do that but the big
thing is just going to be dropping the
stress low and the stress load is
psychological and physiological so too
much sugar and an unstable blood sugar
cycle causes cortisol spiking body reads
it as stress can continuous starvation
cycle responses not enough sleep is a
huge cause of stress both not enough
exercise or exercising in a way that's
causing injury so you've got and as well
as toxins and pathogens that cause
inflammation so all of those can cause
chronic stress as well as all the
psychological sources so one of the you
know you can say that the first good
part of neuro hacking is just health
right health and well-being because so
many people are dealing with brain fog
or low-level anxiety depression before
they seek to optimize beyond baseline
just getting back to baseline is pretty
great so identifying the things that
took them below baseline and reversing
those that shouldn't be the foundational
stuff right I think so many people
neglect that they're trying to kind of
go to superhuman levels rather than just
trying to optimize for what's missing or
for what's kind of below normal levels
so what else is in that spectrum of what
people often overlook we've talked about
cortisol we've talked about the gut
microbiome are there any other important
components of this equation sure this is
not the sexy part this is the like
 don't tell us about the stuff
again part but it's just it's critical
and then the sexy part is the stuff that
seems like
chick bullets that make you make you
have superhero powers so we'll get more
into that the end but those parts really
do there are some really neat exciting
technologies that can be very powerfully
augmenting but they really do function
radically better in a well-tuned system
in an already dysregulated system
doesn't mean they can't help to get you
back to functions in a dysregulated
system but we really want to be
functioning on foundational well being
so first category asleep I say this
because it ends up affecting more
categories of health and psychology
faster than almost anything else and
it's something that is just so easy for
most of us to do a poor job with by
sleep I mean both enough sleep and good
quality sleep so even you know it's give
or take a third of your life but it's
like 90 percent of all the repair that
happens to your physiology and you've
got some very meaningful information
consolidation psychological
consolidation happening in dreams and
theta
almost all the physiologic repair
happens in Delta it's also where the
memory consolidation happens so making
sure that we're getting enough Delta
sleep I would say is a is a huge
foundation now we've got neuro hacks for
helping that you can you know one should
make sure that the foundational things
are in place so that environmentally do
you have a good sleeping environment you
have a good bed is it dark is it quiet
good air quality you're not in a room
with mold or BOC etc and you don't have
people or dogs or whatever waking up
throughout the night we could do a whole
show just on how to make it optimize
sleeping environment and it's a pretty
important thing factoring how how big a
deal it is and then there are definitely
supplements that people can take that
will help them sleep better depending
upon what's wrong with their sleep but
if they're if they're not saving Locals
they're waking up to pee a lot versus
their snoring right those really need
addressed in different ways but
addressing them is really important
there's also
the amount of light that you received
before sleep so many people stay on
their phone right before they go to bed
and that can have really terrible
implications because your brain doesn't
produce enough melatonin yeah so
cortisol and melatonin are in a
circadian rhythm with each other where
cortisol is high in the day low at night
melatonin is low in the day high at
night and it's a light stimulated cycle
and so it's actually important to get
enough bright light during the day if
you don't and your cortisol doesn't
actually go high then it won't come low
enough and give you good sleep at night
but it is important to avoid bright and
blue light before bed so you see a lot
of people wear of blue blocking glasses
or the Flex app on their computer to
take it out of the blue range you know
things like that in general I would say
a winddown routine before bed where you
stop taking in stressful things you stop
blue in the bright light and you start
preparing body and mind for sleep
whether it's through a bath or the right
kind of reading or stretching super
useful we're working on some technology
some biochemical technologies that
induce better delta sleep a number of
different ones one of the ones that were
most excited about is a new kind of
brain inductions called phase-locked
induction and this was a DARPA funded
project originally with some people that
were partnered with out of University of
Northwestern
and rather than try to induce Delta
waves like using binaural beats or
strobe lights or transcranial stem these
researchers recognized that the brain
actually resists having its brain wave
patterns changed externally pretty
strongly because its own process for
regulating the frequency that it's in
which is the opening and closing of the
ion gates is very very sensitive it's
controlled by many factors and it's
really only susceptible to induction
when the gates are open and the ion
channels are open and so they put EEG on
people's head found out when the people
went into Delta sleep
they're specifically trying to improve
the efficiency of Delta sleep and then
exactly when the gates were open they
put in a stimulus for the exact same
wave pattern the same frequency that the
brain was in where it was crest crest
aligned so they weren't changing the
Brayton wave pattern they were just
adding more of the exact brainwave
pattern that the brain was in to add
amplitude which the hypothesis was would
increase the efficiency of everything
that was happening because you get more
net communication per unit time
happening and this happened and so the
first studies that were done were done
on memory and they found a 400% increase
in long-term memory and healthy adults
after a week of using this technology
and that's testing memory but if Delta
sleep is going up that's going to be
helping anxiety it's going to be
decreasing risk for Alzheimer's and the
effecting oxidation and the inflammation
so this technology is not far from being
market ready this is an example of like
really fun neural hacks that were right
on the brink out that is so interesting
it sounds like it's almost tricking the
brain into thinking that is doing a
better job at whatever it's already
doing than it actually is and I wonder
if it has a feedback loop where the
brain picks up that oh this is really
working and and then it knows how it
arrived there because it was already
doing that maybe just to a smaller
degree and then it already knows how to
do that and it does it better next time
is that the case so there are some
therapies where after you do them the
brain continues to do them on its own
because it learns how to do them that's
kind of the exact opposite of the way we
usually think of say psychopharmacology
drugs right which is that they create
dependence and addiction you get off of
them and your brain can do that anymore
because it overrode the natural
regulatory system this is one of our
primary design principles is that we
want to understand what the brain's own
regulatory process and the body's
regulatory process is doing and support
it rather than override it in a way that
whenever someone stops with that
particular technology
gee you have a net neutral - net
positive lasting effect rather than a
down-regulation independence I would say
good neural hacking in general should
have that as one of its criteria with
this particular one I don't think a
study has been done yet on someone using
it for a while and then stopping and
seeing if they continue to get that
elevation from baseline I wouldn't see
it as much as it's trying to trick the
brain as it is supporting it by adding
energy right like if you're if there's
three people pushing a car and one more
person comes along to push it just goes
better because there is you know more
force being added to what's already
happening and so here the goal was as
the brain is modulating its frequency
and it's at the max amplitude that it
can generate if we can just add energy
so we're adding amplitude we're just
going to increase the efficiency of its
process there's something very beautiful
it does something very Aikido about not
we know what the brain should be doing
better and we're going to try and induce
this specific frequency of Delta but we
actually don't know why it is moving
between the frequencies exactly the way
that it does but we're gonna kind of
trust it and follow it and just add
resource
I think stem cells is another way that
you can think about that right did you
think about stem cell therapy we don't
know how the stem cells differentiate
into tissues fully and then all the
metabolic functions of those cells do
but we're simply adding resource to the
system in general I think the approach
to support the system's own regulatory
processes doing what they do better as
opposed to trying to override them is a
is a key distinction and how we should
approach tech interface with the body
interesting and so when it comes to
supplements is this also your approach
that you're trying to support what the
body's already doing rather than kind of
installing a new program oh this is how
you're gonna do it body okay yeah of
course so you know like with the
supplements that we've developed and
more that we're in process of developing
so let's
take quality as an example it's a
nootropic product cognitive enhancement
product that we made because there's a
good example here so some of the
ingredients are actually just nutrients
right they're nutrients that you should
get in food and if you're eating a
healthy diet you'll be getting more of
them than not but their nutrients that
either are very commonly deficient even
in good diets for a number of reasons so
certain trace minerals that are
important for brain function they're
just deficient in soil even organic soil
is still very different than before the
soil originally went through a bunch of
mono cropping and plants can't make
minerals right they're gonna pull up the
minerals that are in the soil similarly
if the soil is deficient in microbiota
it's gonna affect the plant chemistry if
the plants been hybridized so if there
are common deficiencies in certain
nutrients that are necessary for
cognitive capacity or sleep or something
like that making sure that there's
enough of them that's just augmenting
eating and that doesn't mean that you
can then eat poorly right so I use the
word supplement right is that it is to
supplement to be in addition to because
what someone takes a few grams of and
pills compared to what they're taking
like pounds up and food there's no way
that that's going to replace the primary
effect but it can meaningfully add to it
but also it just like if someone is
going to be using some function a lot
more in an evolutionary environment
would have had them use that function
right so if Letta cailli someone's gonna
be sweating a lot more they're going to
lose electrolytes faster so we give them
electrolytes and actually makes a
difference where they're going to be
using branched chain amino acids to
build skeletal muscle more of they're
tearing down skeletal muscle so we
supplement brain shame yes there are
nutrients that get used faster when
someone is in certain kinds of cognitive
process so if they want to spend a lot
of time and peak cognitive process
they're gonna burn through those quicker
so you want to supplement them its brain
nutrients and that is just the body's
gonna convert those so say the the amino
acids that can get converted to
neurotransmitters the vitamins and
minerals that are involved in the
conversion process the body's going to
convert them as it needs them but
not going to have nutrition be a rate
limiting factor so that's obviously
working with endogenous pathway support
there are other things where say we are
looking at the acetylcholine pathway has
a lot to do with memory and learning and
sensory motor function speed of neuronal
communication so the body is producing
acetylcholine it's moving across
synapses it's getting received in the
postsynaptic receptors we can give
plants or chemicals that modulate that
process but that modulate the process in
a much more holistic way than say
traditional psychopharmacological
proaches which is a single drug
intervention that's going to affect one
part right like adderall being a
presynaptic dopamine agonist and then
not necessarily looking at how that
works within the whole dopamine cycle
and how dopamine relates to
norepinephrine and epinephrine and
serotonin the rest of the whole rest of
neurotransmission so we want to look at
if we're gonna affect another
transmitter we want to look at the
entire cycle of that transmitter we want
to look at the cellular processes of the
pre and post synaptic neuron and we want
to look at all the other transmitters
and signaling chemicals that it's in
relationship with and make sure that
we're actually supporting a holistic
process right and so you've got to
factor if you're wanting to be able to
run more acetylcholine to the system the
body's ability to acetylate the choline
so that you have enough acetyl group you
have choline certain source of choline
can go to the peripheral neuron or to
the central nervous system so depending
upon what you want to do you do that
differently and then there are you know
rate limiting cofactors like for that
one it happens to be b5 so you want to
make sure that's not gonna be rate
limiting
but then the acetylcholine getting
across the synapse you have enzymes that
are breaking it down just like you have
enzymes that are breaking down dopamine
or serotonin so you know many of the
pharmaceutical meds that affect
transmitter levels are working by
modulating what's happening in the
synaptic cleft right we have taken
hibbett ER so if some
has genetically high mao levels or comt
levels or acetylcholine esterase levels
then they're going to be sub functional
in that area and you can actually be
able to you know to have a nutria
genomic override to that and if you're
gonna be producing more acetylcholine
and you wanted to get across the synapse
so you're gonna you know help with
acetylcholine esterase inhibitors and
then you actually want to get it up
taken in the postsynaptic neuron right
today the NMDA receptors primarily there
are things that you can use it will
modulate that receptor if you support
the entire cycle of how the body is
actually producing you'll get a lot more
optimum results and you'll end up
getting the body learning how to do that
and being able to actually have
plasticity effect right it's going to
rewire to that state if it does that
state a significant amount and then when
someone gets off it they'll either have
a little effect or lasting positive
effects because they have rewired one of
the bigger ways that you get lasting
effects is by actually working to change
brain structure in a positive direction
so this is things like can we help the
brain develop more new neurons and
increased gray matter density or in or
develop more new synapses so it's called
neurogenesis or synaptogenesis so we get
more densely interconnected brain
structures and there do happen to be a
lot of things that are known about
specific nutrients and specific
chemicals that do support the brains
natural process of neurogenesis
happening more robustly or the brains
process of Naruto a killing old
senescent brain cells that cause
problems and allowing new ones to you
know proliferate and so these are these
are examples of ways you could get
lasting benefit after you know from a
biochemical solution after stopping
taking the biochemical solution because
it's actually seeking to one just tune
the system better and to rewire to
enough regulated State and three
actually support the development of new
structures this is really interesting
I wanted to rewind slide
to where you're talking about
neurotransmitters that regulate mood
because there's a huge industry of
selling drugs that regulate mood that
actually have adverse long-term effects
if you stop taking them or if you
continue taking them they kind of lose
their effectiveness in a way over time
and for example I have experience taking
SSRIs and I had both of those effects
with withdrawal after coming off of them
and and decreasing effectiveness over
time but what you're talking about is
that it's actually possible to have
supplements or drugs that have net
positive effects over time even if you
stop taking them can you talk about that
a bit specifically when it comes to mood
regulation yeah so let me say that the
the ideal way to approach this is a
personalized medicine or personalized
well-being approach because so say the
SSRI did something good for you for a
while but then it had side effects and
it had down regulation and you adapted
to it did it do some good for you
because you actually had a dysbiosis
issue in your gut where you just were
not producing half of the serotonin that
you need that's an important question
right because if so I wouldn't even want
to give you brain supplements I want to
fix your gut or was there actually
something where your diet was deficient
in tryptophan and so the raw amino acid
necessary to make serotonin was low and
we just actually had to address your
diet right or so there's so many things
that can be involved and we can say in
general if someone takes 5htp which is
5-hydroxytryptophan hydroxylated
tryptophan that's just one conversion
step away from 5-hydroxytryptamine to
serotonin and they take the
phosphorylated version of b6 p5p that it
converts the h5 HTTP to serotonin that
they're much since that's just the stuff
that
is one step away from serotonin the body
be working with any ways that they're
less likely to get dependence and
down-regulation from just having enough
of those things than they would from an
SSRI that's true and and ideally I would
find out what's going on first because
we also see so many people who they get
on an SSRI and then they get much worse
right so many of the shooting cases that
we've seen were after someone was put on
an SSRI who hadn't been on it before and
the suicidal homicidal tendencies are
true because if someone is more dopamine
deficient in their depression and they
really needed something like wellbutrin
instead like this is what's so crazy to
me is we don't even do any kind of
testing to see that the neurochemical
imbalance before we give them chemistry
rather than psychology and then to the
degree that there even is a
neurochemical amounts we don't know
which one or which ones and then to the
degree that we even knew which one we
don't know why it's off and the answer
is just straight to a drug yeah that's
just crazy it is and think about this so
your brain is as complex a system as we
know of existing in universe right and
you've got the the number of neurons and
of glial cells and the number of
synaptic connections and the number
metabolic processes per individual one
and the feedback and feed-forward
processes is just completely
mind-boggling so when you think about
something like serotonin right that is a
it's a signaling molecule that's the end
of many steps of metabolic transform so
if it's low how likely is it that other
things are low or high or dysregulated
or there's something else off like it's
pretty high right when we just go
straight to let's get more serotonin
right let's keep it from you know
reuptake and because we have to you know
in the drug the drug industry has to use
synthetic single molecules to be able to
get them patented which is the only way
that they could ever make enough money
to go through FDA trials and that's FDA
but every country has you
some version but I think us probably
leads the way in some of both the good
and bad aspects of this what's the
chance that a single synthetic molecule
meaning it's not part of your natural
landscape at all and it's just one
molecule could ever be an adequate
solution to a complex chemistry
dysregulation in a self-organizing
system like your brain like it just
doesn't even make sense right it doesn't
make sense that that could possibly be
the thing that's really gonna repair it
yeah so it's usually gonna be not one
molecule that's off but lots of them and
so then we have to from maybe lots of
different processes so how do we
identify what's going on and support the
system's increasing its own internal
resilience I mean this same is like when
you talk about cognitive chemistry this
cognitive chemistry mediated via
dopamine or via acetylcholine or
glutamate or sodium ion channels or
long-term potentiation or all those
things right complex interactions and
lots of those things and so one of the
key things is that when you're wanting
to work with a complex system like a
brain you've really got to have a more
complexity informed approach than single
molecule interventions mm-hmm so you're
saying we're mostly involved in this
single molecule interventions because
that's what's profitable it's not just
that's what's profitable that's the only
thing that you can because it's
profitable it's only thing you can even
afford to do research on right you know
when you hear things like well there are
not so many good scientific trials done
on herbs
who the would pay for them I mean
you'll see little trials done on herbs
but it costs a billion dollars give or
take to take a drug through FDA approval
well who's gonna put in a billion
dollars and then when you take the drug
through you're not even sure that it's
gonna work in the market and then you
have a class-action lawsuit at the end
like you've got to have a twenty billion
dollar potential on that for it to make
any sense to even embark on right so of
course you've got to have a patent on it
and so if you have something that's not
patentable and even in the drug space
there are certain drugs that got
published about in a way that makes them
unpatentable and even though they're
super promising they just don't get
developed because who would develop
right because
if it's not a synthetic chemical if it's
already available in nature they
probably can't patent it for example in
my case I've been using peganum harmala
seeds for mood regulation and I've had
really excellent effects with them much
much better than I ever had with SSRIs
also combined with meditation and diet
adjustments but you know if something
like that was patented as a mood
regulation supplement if they probably
couldn't patent it well no they they
definitely can't patent it but even some
synthetics can't get patented because
you know the information was already
released and so now it's part of the
Commons or after the patent life on a
drug expires and so now it's not really
profitable because the generics are all
going to be really cheap then we need to
before a drug company look for a new
thing in that space even if the new
things are not better or even shittier
than the previous thing simply because
we just can't make money doing that so
what are the ways around it supplements
don't have to go through FDA approval
think about from pharmaceutical industry
what it means to invest something like a
billion dollars of capital before you've
made your first dollar back right like
that's so far from Silicon Valley
software tech thinking that's a lot of
money to invest before you know actually
having any revenue but yeah so
supplements they don't have to do that
but they can't claim that they have any
medical purpose or heal anything so then
that becomes the tricky thing if they
want to claim it they have to go through
FDA process if they're gonna go through
FDA process that's super expensive and
they're gonna have to have a profit
stream to be able to justify it so
that's the deal basically to really fix
that the entire regulatory financial and
intellectual property structures have to
be changed and realistically I can say
for-profit medicine is a broken system
because when you have a for-profit sick
care system where people come in ill
pharmaceuticals or hospitals or
insurance or anybody you know any money
that's going to be made in the
two trillion dollar complex of health
care is only made when people are sick
so prevention would just obsolete that
entire profit stream right and so then
you start thinking about patients as
customers and every MBA first thing they
learn is how do you maximize the
lifetime value of a customer and that
should never apply to a patient right
theory of markets the free market should
apply to things that one can choose in
to choose out of you can't reasonably
choose out of health care and so it
should not be structured in the
for-profit way that it is any more than
for-profit prisons should be yeah you're
optimizing for what you don't want
exactly you know as I was talking to a
group that was working on peace and
reconciliation the other day and I asked
them what's the chance of having the
world free from war or any militarized
conflict while having a for-profit
military-industrial complex lastingly
and they realized that supply and demand
theory says zero percent chance that
those two could coexist in during Lee
right because if there isn't demand for
that supply it'll shut down and stop
existing will be a for-profit complex or
it will have to do supply-side economics
and create demand and so that means that
you have the largest block of economics
have its own survival antithetical to
global peace that's that's a up
structure for Humanity and for-profit
prisons are the same and for-profit
health care is the same when you start
going through you see how many places
the financial incentive the game theory
is exactly opposite to what the
collective goal should be so like what
it takes to really fix medicine and
health care and well-being care etc the
IP has to change where we're not focused
on patentable things and then separate
patents that can't be combined because
different IP holders have them and only
unnatural things etc but the whole IP
process is broken and it needs to move
to maximum innovation
ownership restriction the financial
models have to change where all the
financial incentive is aligned with what
we actually want which is optimized
collective well-being not otherwise and
that doesn't look like any fiscal health
care system we've had and the scientific
model has to change rather than a you
know small number of variable
reductionist approach to understanding a
complex self-organizing system we have
to actually get better at complexity
science and understanding the body as a
regulatory system the body mind complex
regulatory system
what causes regulatory breakdown and how
to support increased regulatory capacity
of the system rather than just
overriding it all the time right it's a
whole different set of incentives it's a
different kind of science it's different
incentives and it's different legal
structures and so yes there's a lot of
things that we want to evolve in
diagnostic medicine and therapeutic
medicine and AI interpretation and you
know but deeper than all that are these
meta structures that need to evolve so
going back to the kind of specific
approaches that you are taking how are
you
building these meta structures in a
different way than they currently exist
yeah so we're obviously within the
within the confines of those meta
structures to begin with so we're our
first products are supplements the
reason why we chose to do supplements is
to be able to bring things direct to
consumer that's what it's going to be
called rather than to go through FDA
process and a doctor process and
specifically since we're working with
some synthetics but largely you know
synthetics and natural compounds both so
a lot of unpatentable things and
combinations of them and you know moving
towards customizable combinations it's
outside of patentability so for all
those reasons that made sense and
because we wanted to be able to control
the integrity of the company we wanted
to take on very little capital and only
very values align capital and so we
wanted to build things that we could
actually build ourselves first to then
be able to grow the company and
continues for like friends
the first product we brought to market
quality our cogs on their right just our
cost of goods is higher than the retail
costs of most other cognitive enhancers
on the market and all the investors
looked at well you got to get the cogs
down and like there is no way to get it
down until we get to huge economies of
scale and vert and owning our own supply
chain without cutting quality because I
run a bunch of additional steps of
testing to make sure that there's you
know optimized purity and potency and
that no mycotoxin or whatever got into
the supply and manufacturing and use
forms that are more expensive forms of
all the ingredients and you know amounts
that are actually meaningful which is
expensive so part of it is when you're
working within those structures knowing
what your mission is very clearly so
your mission is not delivering returns
to shareholders first it's actually
delivering meaningful technology to
enrich people's lives and if you don't
have something that they'll do that you
just don't do it that's a really key
first part of it right and then being
able to grow while maintaining control
of that mission is a key part of it how
else we working with those meta
structures well we open-source our
information so as far as IP we just
don't believe in it so rather than say
we have a proprietary blend of this
number of milligrams of things we just
have the exact number of milligrams of
the exact sources and all the sourcing
info so if anyone wants to just go buy
the raw ingredients make it themselves
they're welcome to if someone wants to
try and make a better formula they can
because we just want to support the
field advancing for optimized human
wellbeing as best as possible and so
that's we we have a strong open-source
take on everything IP and then
reinvesting our capital in developing
new technologies and really focusing on
not where is the highest profit margin
technology but what are the technologies
that will really make the biggest
difference in addressing the things that
cause most suffering that are the least
well addressed currently all right on
this bright and shiny note we're gonna
end this episode we still got an hour
in this interview but that's going to be
in the next episode to check out the
show notes from this episode go to
future thinkers org slash 42 and the
second half of this interview will be at
future thinkers dot org slash 43 wants
it's live see in the next one thanks for
listening to the future thinkers podcast
to get notified of new podcasts and
videos go to future thinkers org and
subscribe to our mailing list you can
also find us on iTunes stitcher and you
tube if you like what we do and you want
to help us make more podcasts and videos
give us a like or if you share it with
your friends and consider becoming a
patron go to patreon.com/scishow to
cutting machinery org slash power last
but not least if you want to get access
to more content hidden episodes or if
you just want to chat with us in
previous guests then check out our
community at community future thinkers
org
[Music]
you
[Music]