whether you're watching on YouTube or
listening as a podcast remember to
subscribe and hit the bell to track
upcoming releases yeah okay so it's
really nice to sit with you all here the
Sun is in a different place for many of
us but it seems like there's still some
light color coming through your room :
at least is there a bit um I just
actually bought some nice lighting right
before I right before I went into
quarantine because I'm going to be
recording some videos so so that is not
natural light yeah so you know it's my
intention with this really above all
that this is an opportunity for us to to
talk with each other
and really just to be here we are
recording this and I hope is that it
will be helpful and interesting for
people and beneficial in some way but I
always wonder if having that as an
objective is in some sense putting the
cart before the horse maybe they come
together suppose it wouldn't be a horse
and cart if you didn't happen both so
it's a funny expression in some sense
but the the place I always find myself
in when we when we begin to talk like
this with an intention to tune in and be
with each other to go a bit deeper and
to engage in a process of understanding
is a real gratitude for the opportunity
and I noticed a a change in my body and
and bine and there's a sense in which
that thing is what I'm most in service
of here because it seems to me that
Union and somehow begin the process of
comprehending what is occurring in the
world at the moment and we can all of a
sudden reveal a whole range of
existential themes and very real
possibilities that were seeing manifest
in the collective psyche at the moment
and fear many of us are experiencing and
so fundamentally what comes first here
is this we we are together and the
sharing of this for anyone to listen to
is something that you know you all as
far as I'm concerned have a say in so
here and now is prime I mean for me and
you know with that said that we could
begin by very briefly introducing who we
are and it could be as simple as this is
my name the interest I suppose you have
in being here and engaging in this
conversation I should say that part of
what we'll be doing here is going
through a seeking to make sense of -
something a doctor Dan Hall has put
together called situational assessment
right now which is a well at an
assessment of various aspects of I meant
a crisis that we are facing and and
interrelated self crises that may be
upon us as triggered by this coronavirus
event but it's not all doom and gloom
there's very much opportunity as well
and so this is both sides I hope we can
realize it together so Peter perhaps if
you don't mind saying if he thinks to
introduce how you feeling and who you
are
yeah so I'm a Peter Limburg I'm feeling
pretty just very grounded right now and
just like excited being here with you
all and I don't really know how to
introduce myself
maybe it's via my podcast and the
podcast host for the intellectual
explorers podcast and I think I was
guests on everyone's podcast here both
Ann Zion 2.0 and then voice club now
voice craft and were whatever or the
space that were collectively in the
sense making web whatever I feel a sort
of philia with with you all so I'm glad
to be here I'll take Colin Oh next yeah
it's a real pleasure to be here I was
just thinking Peter when you mentioned
that you've been a guest on all the
podcasts I just started having like
flashes of memories that are mostly
auditory because I've listened to all of
your podcasts too and there's just like
this flash of different memories of
conversations snippets of conversations
and yeah I never really knew why I
started that podcast in the first place
and there's something about this moment
that feels like an invitation to find a
little more clarity about what that is
but for right now just dropping in and
talking with you guys feels good I have
been feeling anxious I've been feeling
ecstatic at times I've been feeling
grateful confused and I actually didn't
read the situational assessment on
purpose because I wanted to come in
with the person with with questions so
yeah so I'm happy to be here thanks to
him and Peter for setting this up and
I'll pass the baton on to Jared all
righty
mm yeah I guess my name's Jared Jaynes I
co-host the both and Bob guest with our
last in line Jason Neider and yeah I
don't know I think I don't know if I've
said it publicly but I always kind of
consider us like sister podcasts I don't
know why that phrase comes up but that's
it that's how I categorized all of y'all
and yeah it's just uh there's a
reservoir of fluency and rapport that
has been established personally and
through the appreciation of all of our
different podcasts that's gonna be
really a fun fun foundation to to push
off from so excited to see where this
heads out Amen sister yes yeah yes I'm
Jason Caguas or on Twitter and I'm the
co-host both have podcast with Jared
over here and let's see how I've been
feeling well I just moved into a new
house last week and so there's a lot of
changes of course the situation we're in
is provoking a lot of thoughts some
anxieties but also kind of a sense of
inevitability that like you know we've
in the sense making space we've been
talking about existential risks and the
meta-crisis and all of these things
coming down the pike and it's been
theoretical and now it's not so
theoretical anymore it's not quite well
we you know there was a whole range of
things that could you know could have
happened and could keep happening and
now it's happening and so it's it's a
sense of inevitability of like okay here
we go
you know this is
pretty bad but it's not as bad as I
think what's coming like this it might
be a domino effect but I think with
ecological crisis it's gonna be much
much worse than this and and so this is
a great opportunity to get ready to get
ourselves resilient to get ourselves
coordinated to sense make all of these
things that you know this for me this is
like the training ground so that's
that's kind of how I'm coming into this
this meeting here today yeah beautiful
so the next up here is two on the go a
bit of the meditation together so Jared
I believe sure yeah yeah all right so I
guess the first step is always to see if
we can sit up straight get our spines
nice and elongated and I was thinking
just about right around five minutes is
that cool - yes
all right so let's just start by closing
our eyes to get a couple deep breaths
and I like to always settle into things
by breathing into my my chest my heart
center I'm gonna fill it up a little bit
maybe even with a little bit of a sense
of gratitude for each of those breaths
that we are able to have and then when
some of this you start to feel into what
this gratitude feels like make those out
breaths about giving it away any
reservation just releasing it completely
for others
and then receive it now I want to take
us on a bit of a exploration of our
experience and maybe in some spaces that
are alive for a lot of us right now so
let's start by bringing our awareness to
what we hear and not only what we hear
but where it's located so you'll hear my
voice very close right in your ear maybe
you'll hear some ambient noises of the
room or from outside the house each one
of them has their own location you see
how far your sense of space can expand
using those cues of noise sound to build
it now see if just for a moment instead
of concentrating on the sounds you can
just contact the space in between all of
these sounds and sensations and as you
do that let's start pulling our focus
and a little bit closer to our body
until we get a good sense of the empty
space around us where that barrier is
now maybe it's very gently just bringing
our attention to our abdomen area our
gut and see if there's any
sensations to notice here maybe some
constriction maybe not if there is
something there see if you can find its
boundaries see if it has any movement be
with that for a moment now it's take
that attention and gently start bringing
it up to our heart center see what we
can feel there so you can feel a
solidness a wholeheartedness deads now
after sitting with this this heart
feeling whatever it is maybe it's not a
feeling maybe it's an absence of feeling
or you can't quite detect something
that's fine but slowly as we wrap things
up on this short exploration of our
experience let's try and stay in contact
with our heart because I know we all
have a lot of time to spend in our minds
but let's try and bring some heart as
well
maybe just slowly opening your eyes
you're just letting a little bit of
light in and then a little bit more
keeping this contact with the heart
maybe even acting from it
what would that feel like now we open
our eyes fully ready move forward I
think
you
you
you
you
so thank you yeah yeah thanks for
indulging me on our little trip well
something that really struck me then and
this no new thing to be struck by is the
different departure points or launch
points or ways our body mind heart the
whole thing feels when we begin to step
in again to communication or step in
again to an intention an action which
now is catalyzing something else and
there's something so interesting about
that the individual phenomenology of it
and how that couples with the social
effect of it and I wonder also it's the
importance of its relation to our
collective sense making of our present
moment and fundamentally be the actions
that may or may not be taken
collectively so that we might what then
we begin to characterize what we might
wish to be the case and I say we could
come together to make a decent
characterization of that a world of the
kind of content
that enables potential to be furthered
development to be furthered connection
to be deepened being to be appreciated
loved to be felt and shared and all
together what matters in life to
continue and open itself into the future
in a way that we can be in integrity
with we can feel some sort of trust in
and I notice in myself every day how I
respond to situations in ways which do
not necessarily create the outcomes that
a higher part of me or a more connected
part of me a more stoic part of me
perhaps visa may may wish to see and
that's something that fascinates me
about these
of communication and I I I'd ask our
listeners to really feel and tune into
because it does seem to be the case that
a communicating from a more grounded
centered place
Jared Jim mentioned the heart what is it
like just to speak and be anchored from
there what is it a like like to be
centered aligned in touch with what a
good the true and the beautiful that we
can be so lovely not so easy but there
seems to be a more towards a direction
of that and then more of reactivity and
and so mind then I to begin talking
about systemic things in the world how
do you feel we could begin to bite into
all of that when they just say one thing
to kind of anchor a bit of why I chose
that those specific areas to pay
attention to when you guys asked if I
would be interested in hosting something
I think it was this morning because this
came together pretty quick i sat with
someone certainty for a bit of what I
was going to say or what would be
interesting and then noticed that a lot
of conversations that I've been having
kind of centered around a few different
reactions some of them were
predominantly cognitive you know what's
the science what is the rational
calculation that we need to be doing
here which is you know acting
from ed than some of them some people
went straight to having sense of care
for those who were in in jeopardy for
whatever reason from all the myriad of
outcomes that have been reverberating
across culture right now and then the
other one which may be the most human
one and and the big thing here too is of
course we all act from all of these in
their own way but is the fearful one and
this would be that gut area I think it's
really good to kind of learn to get in
contact with that you know this is I
mean it really it's our mortality right
it's it's being reminded that things are
not quite as safe as they were but well
that is valuable because it draws a lot
of attention due to our experience I
feel like when we act we should be
acting from a place of compassion and
then using our mind to reflect on how
things are how it's working and if we
keep all of these together it's you know
if we can have a frame that includes all
of them there's a more holistic way of
acting in our own experience and that
interesting thing too as we say so
there's kind of a negative side I said
that originally the mind was there for
thinking but the mind is also there and
what's causing a lot of distress from
the mind is the confusion the openness
of the situation right and that's going
to be there and guess what you know we
just discovered there's a bunch of space
in our experience that we don't really
have any clarity on and that's always
the case but if we can keep it in - if
we can bring it into the picture
Minh eise's with with other areas of our
experience so yeah just a few thoughts
to kind of say where that came from and
maybe a thread that we could pull on
somewhere there I've been reflecting in
the last couple days upon like coming
back to you know accepting what we
perceived reality to be as it is not not
resisting reality I think couple days
ago like I was trying to sleep and I was
having some anxiety and having trouble
sleeping and then the next day I mean it
was you know it's clicked on just
clicked with me many times before but
you know has to happen over and over
again like look this notion of safety
this notion of comfort you know this
notion of being disconnected from life
you know and even kind of a we talked
about the meaning crisis you know things
are pretty damn meaningful now right we
don't I don't think people are worried
about the meaning crisis at this point
right and that's because our own you
know our own safety you know our own
creature comforts are on the line and so
that kind of bring grounds us pretty
quickly and you know this notion of not
resisting reality but like okay nothing
is certain here you know I don't know
what's gonna happen I can you know won't
moments I can make the best decisions
that I can I can try and be in touch
with you know my body and what my body
is telling me is Jared mentioned but you
know I'm not taking anything for granted
right and I think as tragic as this is
and it is tragic a lot of people are
going to die I mean that's and there's
no getting around that a lot of people
are dying at the same time you know this
kind of tragedy seems to be the only way
that we can grow as humanity to to
evolve to
in a direction that we need to move if
we're going to survive as a collective
organism yeah it's it's interesting it
seems to be the case and I heard John
Devaki and Jordan wool have a discussion
just the other day on John's channel and
one of the questions they raised is
something I think we've all thought
about a lot I know I have relates to the
nature of addiction and perhaps in
particular to the scenario and whether a
friend or a family member or just
someone you know they are in the throes
of that the reciprocal closing of their
salience landscape as John might say or
that the meaning they're grasping out
for is a short-term fix or protection to
paper over a deeper hole lack of
connection in their lives that word
connection with others lack of belief
perhaps in the possibility that things
could change so we have this narrowing
and narrowing of scope until all of a
sudden reality snaps back and whether
the body gives way or a relationship
breaks down there is some absolute rock
bottom of gambling say seems to be the
case than in many of the people I've
spoken to
there is that rock bottom moment that
calms and from there the trajectory is
reset and the change occurs the question
is how deep does that rock bottom have
to be in the case of our collective
situation how is this tragedy enough and
what a fine point to turn on whether
a tragedy or collapses so great that the
continuity or the hope for continuity of
civilization that we might desire either
persists or not is so tenuous and if we
perhaps don't go low enough just
Scrabble back things together in roughly
the same order and continue just as we
were before without learning lessons and
I think that is a really fascinating
dynamic how how how how necessary is is
that place of rock bottom and can we
have any agency in extending an
invitation perhaps to an initiation
something we like so much an initiation
into that kind of experience so that we
don't have to risk but it's just
something that came up for me Jason it's
ER it's a seems to me to be a a tight
thing a very fine margins yeah I can
that initiation thread it's like um an
initiation is something that is entered
into with intention and something that's
witnessed by a community and you begin
in one place and end in a completely
different place and like you said like
it's not like there's a meaning crisis
anymore there's work we have meaning up
to our eyes right now
so that that's the to me that's content
or something to use as an ingredient in
this some sort of initiative process and
I'm curious if like like what what sorts
of initiations are are happening right
now and is there potential to sort of
open source a process of designing one
and entering into it with complete
humility like like I don't know what
this will look like but just curiosity
about maybe there's an assumption that
an initiation could be a valuable thing
hmm and maybe maybe move with that
intention I'm curious if you guys have
any thoughts on that yeah like what's
coming to mind I was on another call as
a repla wisdom call and we were just
sort of talking about the situation and
someone said that it feels like I'm
about like get married like it feels
like it's like a marriage just going to
happen it's kind of anxiety associated
with that situation and then someone
else said after that is I think divorce
is a better metaphor if it was like a
divorce is happening and then someone
throughout like you know a birth thing
pains and whatnot and then the
initiation piece comes to mind as well
and I when you're talking with that
column what came to mind was what is the
best net
for to use in this situation was the
wisest metaphor and maybe not being so
concerned about the descriptive aspect
like are we getting the metaphor right
is it accurate but more of the kind of
normative aspect was like the most
ethical metaphor we can use that's going
to inspire us and and maintain this
feeling of meaningfulness but inject it
with wisdom really kita I put I'd say
just a few things on the meaning crisis
and of course we can have a crisis of
not enough meaning and then we can also
have a crisis of too much without and
wisdom might be the right word to use
without a way to to be in relationship
with that to transform with that to
bring it in and out you know to expand
and contract it and to do so in a way
that's in what could we use was a right
relationship with community with ecology
I think we're going to see the effect
that is meaningful it's like we've got
to do something about that sale our
bodies our hearts all of it is is
activated and and where does that energy
go you know we could see very much we
can see the various responses to the the
death of God in the form of holding
tight to ideology that might be
fragmented distortion of the whole that
is in some sense ER almost necessarily
disconnected from a we that we can all
participate in and sort of creates an
us-and-them in order to sustain itself
sense is is
it's closed I think to the the essence
of transforming meaning itself on an
ongoing basis in a way perhaps more in
touch with the drastic changes of our
time and so adding that in then to the
initiation piece with what does wisdom
therefore look like and perhaps we could
presence just again what we began by
talking about some degree which is this
relationship between speeding from being
from perhaps discerning from at least
important in this heart or a certain
aligned centeredness aura grounded
missing something and transmitting that
with each other mode of communication so
what does so calling repeated to to pick
up them what does what does what does a
wise initiation process look like can we
say anything about that I'm having
trouble getting around the the
distinction between you know each of our
situations in our and you know in in
real life in IRL of course this is also
real life but you know what I mean and
you know when we have these
conversations about what wouldn't an
initiation look like it's very strange
to to consider it in this kind of you
know digital space right because at
least in my mind in my background you
know I I grew up
in kind of a very you know one of the
traditions I grew up in was very much
around this kind of traditional set of
structures and initiations that but it
was like you know I was there like I was
like touching the ground right and I was
with people and interact with them at
their worst moments and that there you
know and at their better moments and
going through this process this very
physical process you know so it's it's
hard for me to I don't know like I just
I'm having trouble understanding what
we're talking about I guess is what I'm
saying you know separate from my mind it
immediately goes to where I'm living and
I'm like okay you know who I'm pretty
new in my area but starting to develop a
community you know starting to develop
ideas for you know how I want to help
this community evolve to co-evolve with
his community and with the land I'm on
and the the ecology and the history and
the background and to me that like when
I bring up an initiation process and
when I think of it in those terms I'm
like yes okay I can start working
thinking in those terms but we're
thinking about digital space I just
don't you know it's too abstract for me
I really like that there was a moment
and previously I just had the desire to
talk about my immediate experience
that's pretty much it's like that's
feeling occupying like maybe 80% of my
thought about you know what to do with
with my my wife of my family do we go up
up north do we bunker down here just
like the practicalities of the situation
and sort of a localism type reach out to
my neighbors and so there's a desire to
kind of talk about that figure out what
you guys are doing and then I
I think this is what you're gesturing at
Jason and I feel it does that just the
risk of entering into a masturbatory
space with ideas and like I'll be the
first to acknowledge like I totally you
know masturbated with ideas my podcast
lately that's the podcasting yeah
and it's fun it's creative you just like
have ideas sex ideation and I think
there's like some something there that
could be utilized for the situation that
creativity that being comfortable in
liminal spaces that could be of use and
of service right now but I just saw a
lot more grounded when you said what you
said Jason and I didn't kind of want to
see if we can kind of merge both of
those tendencies yeah I mean this sounds
I mean this is very practical but I I
think we need to start converting these
networks we have online and I think
we're all you know pretty pretty
networked and you know there's it's kind
of becoming a broad space but we need to
start converting them into real life
communities right it's you know when I
when I hear say conversations about game
B it's great great ideas but it hasn't
really been instantiated anywhere where
has it been accentuated right like we
need to start putting boots on the
ground in places start developing sense
of places and you know it you know for
many of us that might mean like so for
example one great thing about coming
here to this region in southern
Appalachia is like okay I don't really
know they really know many people but
you know there's somebody in the space
that I knew that being Ben Horne who
lives not too far away you know and
we've met up a couple times and you know
and it's starting to feel like I can see
the seed of a real community here that
is kind of connecting the digital
ideation space with you know real life
community with real you know that
involves real goods and you know
resources and mutual aid you know in our
physical lives right because many of us
do have challenges in our physical lives
that you know maybe we don't Express
online but they're real right you know
financial issues or you know health
issues many different things that is you
know it's very it's very tangible and I
think we need to start moving in that
direction I know that in Boulder you
guys have a great community there that
you're forming and I think that's that's
wonderful you know but I think that's
that's the direction we need to move in
like we need to start finding each other
and getting closer to each other
whatever that means right and actually
serving each other in our physical space
as well as our ideational space yes
yes I couldn't agree more
Jason this is why I've been so amped
about your your farming stuff yeah all
the farming posts like that it's like
the like a picture of a plant coming out
of the ground this it's like the clothes
you closest you can get to like touching
the ground through a computer screen
right okay yeah so yeah I mean the whole
initiatory piece it doesn't work without
embodiment I mean I totally agree with
you Jason and and for me it's more about
like like how do you harness the power
of digital communication platform it's
like well maybe maybe it's a matter of
connecting with your immediate
experience like like Peters open
sourcing your process what are you going
through and you make yourself available
to other people who may have you may
have a need and you have a solution to
just like making making the context that
you are most able to serve in available
and putting that out there yeah yeah and
I guess I would you know just add and
also copy out what I what I said is I do
think
you know the wonderful thing about today
is that you know we're not when we talk
about things like localism or building
kind of like a commons based kind of
communities or facto localism or you
know something like that is it's not
we're not going to the past for bringing
the past the wisdom of the past into the
future right but we're what we're also
bringing with it is this digital
technology for one you know and
technology more broadly which I think
you know we must utilize you know and
you know peer-to-peer technology for
example is a great example of how or
just if you have wisdom to share or what
you're doing calling I know you have
this idea of like stripping for as like
you know it workstation you know for the
you know kernel and I think that's a
really fun cool idea right I mean that's
a great example of combining this kind
of what you know kind of this embodied
thing but also connecting it to this
water network and I think that's that's
cool and so yeah I think that's the best
really the key task right now is we've
been in this ideational space and we're
realizing the need for resiliency right
and and that means in real life and so
bridging these two worlds and you know
so they're they're kind of giving each
other feedback coat you know feedback
over bus'ness right I think is that's
that's the challenge that I that I see
and the opportunity yeah yeah there's
this this thread that are a few threads
that I feel like are weaving together
now so we started with a question in
about wisdom and I think wisdom what
I've come to associated with is not so
much about what the right thing to do is
but to bring an openness to
the table you know kind of the the are
kinda classic archetype of the socratic
who knows he knows nothing right I think
wisdom
the reason it's valuable is because it
doesn't direct boundaries for us it
actually keeps all the territory open
for exploration and so I see this this
wisdom component being essential
especially in this kind of meta tribal
space you know it's it's not the it has
some similarities to our tribal past but
we're a connected global civilization
there has to be an openness for people
to collaborate and not be locked in
their own ideological bubbles and to
learn from each other the moment we go
down to locking everything down into
private groups that don't communicate
and don't exchange we're just a
disconnected group of groups and so so
much of that wisdom component I feel
like is a lot of what what what this
online work does exploring different
perspectives playing with boundaries and
borders finding connections relations I
know Jason and I used the phrase
pneumatic mediation law yeah I feel like
this is kind of nourishing a or the
intention from a strong intention I feel
is to nourish this openness of mind so
that then when we act our body doesn't
have limitations
it can MIDI in our environment can go
where it is needed to be and to act from
care and compassion and not be
obstructed but aided by our open minds
as opposed to closed ones yeah I
couldn't say something about that
like I I've been noticing the how much
in survival mode I've been like my
roommates and I like we just started a
pretty robust quarantine procedure for
for the four of us that live here
and and just how much of my attention
has been occupied by making sure all the
supplies are in order I can get just
like getting the getting the nest ready
to roost and not a lot of my attention
has been on how can it be most
compassionate it's been on like how do I
set myself up for a longer term success
I don't burn out um and I it feels very
different and it feels very different in
the body acting probably place of
compassion versus pure gut survival it's
quite a stark contrast actually between
spaces when I have been acting from a
really open heart
yeah well and the gut is the core thing
there right cuz yeah we can't ignore our
survival instincts they should do
they're there for a reason
they yeah I think the problem is is just
when we've become to contain or to
constrictor around one of these areas so
trying to constantly expand our space to
include each one of them the confusion
the fear and the compassion to all arise
simultaneously yeah but to exclude any
of them this is not good and everyone's
situation is going to be unique in what
type of preparing they need to do and
their body knows everybody everybody has
such a different context and perspective
so it's gonna be marion of ways but if
we're only focused on the survival mode
that's when we get this can't panic
behavior where you know it's basically
an anxiety it's a hyperventilation and
when we get those cultural
hyperventilation 'z they shut down
systems you know so it's good to not be
completely consumed by them and what
came to mind there is return to the
thought of wisdom it seems like what you
described what you're doing Colin and to
use your model Jared I think that got in
the heart it seems pretty
to like you know put the oxygen mask on
first you know kind of like get some
level of survival instincts online and
look after you you know yourself and
your loved ones before turning the
attention on to you know like the whole
or like you know from the heart at least
that's how I am processing it right now
but like I feel like if we're going to
use that model again from the head to
the gut to the heart it feels like I'm
just fluttering and flickering
sporadically between all of them and not
being grounded and I don't feel like I'm
operating with wisdom at the moment yeah
Peter you said you'd send a tweet the
other day where you said do you I forgot
you weren't about it was like you lost
your stoicism is that how you said it
yes can you talk more about what you
meant by that I got angry so I've been
like peeing lots of different people
like you know kind of like really
intelligent people in our space having
conversations with um people from like
you know old co-workers from high school
just to get a sense of everyone right of
what they're going through how they're
experiencing with this and there's a lot
of uh I guess denial about the situation
like it's just a flu this was maybe this
is changing now rapidly so maybe people
aren't changing their opinions but it's
just the flu is gonna go by a way by May
and then just and then there's there's
like this almost a sense of like wanting
to be right now and I'm like this is not
the time to even want to be right about
this and there's an irritation I guess
from people's unwillingness to even kind
of consider like bad - worst-case
scenarios and then kind of thinking
through them it's like I had this it was
the incident yesterday that you know I'm
preparing I'm leaning on the side of
being more prepared so you know having
month supply cash on hand you know kind
of a getaway out of the city and then
why I tell this plans to someone who's
like just say I don't wanna use this
word but like someone who's maybe gone
more on the normy side right like
somebody was not plugged into any of
these intellectual spaces I told that to
one of them and then she's called me a
conspiracy theorist for being prepared
as I am and then I was talking to a
friend who's sort of plugged in the
whole conspiracy theory realm with
keyonnah
stuff and he called me a Normie for
being as prepared as I am it's like my
mind was like whoa and then and then
both of those being called in or maybe
call the conspiracy theorists just
bothered me and then having kind of like
tension with my parents who kind of
wanting to is this some of these
narratives and so I just lost my
stoicism which got angry and I ran with
the anger without trying to you know
usually have a relationship in
maintaining serenity with it so that was
the spirit of that tweet mmm what is
running away with anger what did that
look like just indulging in it uh-huh
yeah just say did you break anything no
just my stoicism did you did you like
yell at people I'm just confused how
anger like manifests yeah that's a good
question yeah got into kind of
unnecessary kind of arguments that would
feel that's just feels petty do you do
have a judgement around that like do you
think it's do you think it's bad that
you lost your stoicism no oddly enough
like it's just more fact that you don't
accept what it is so that's what
happened but I think I want to be in
more in a state where you know I don't
kind of indulge into anger because I
don't think that was healthy in that
context mm-hmm well I will just say from
my perspective you're reaching out and
getting different perspectives from such
a broad swath of people like that is
that sounds very wise to me right it was
opening things up taking stock broadly
and your anger might have been because
bringing wisdom to that and others being
quick to jump to conclusions about other
perspectives or the totality of what
what's happening I mean that that's I'm
more constricted you know closed mind I
suppose but yeah so it seems natural I
had a similar similar thing with some
family members where there wasn't a
seriousness and I
there's sternness that is quite rare
from from me
that came out but it it also might have
been appears to be somewhat effective so
yeah I think it's sometimes it's there
for a reason it's just like to your
point that like right it's like not
indulging in it I'm not getting consumed
by it completely like it's always a very
fiery element it's quick and bursts up
and but if you know how it to burst up
it kind of quickly dissipates as well
like indulging in an emotion versus like
having the courage to actually feel it
like what's the difference I think
there's I think for me the difference
ISM is there's a much meta awareness of
it is there so you can notice the anger
and you can harness it but there's still
you know you're not it doesn't
completely take you over versus it just
completely takes you over and you lose
your self of course the self is a whole
other time I don't know if that
resonates with what's hanging on to it
too long acting from anger and then
there's a moment where you do come in to
mentor awareness and you can choose you
know you can choose to drive the needle
in a little bit further seems to me I
remember distinctly I think yeah as a
teenager even now I meana in times of
stress so our situation myself or my
partner we were looking for an apartment
for the first part of this year and I
was staying with different friends and
staying with her and it wasn't an easy
time anyway and
I had a sense of not wanting to sign any
contracts and feeling that something was
coming I was tracking this is quite a
morose situation for really most of
January and if I if not for this my
relationship I wouldn't have chosen to
come back down to Melbourne me in the
city I just felt not it felt it felt
like I was going in it was like alright
shields up you know I'm gonna be taking
on a load by doing this and there's been
one thing after the other two get
together that baseline security that we
get presents theater so necessary in
order to be of help from a place of more
connected connectedness and man and some
of like moving just full day's of that
you know moving somewhere where with
quite a high density area there isn't a
sense of community particularly moving
somewhere where there's it's not
possible to gather so the live events
and the gatherings I was holding you
know they cannot continue this year and
and so for many reasons anger or
frustration or being directive about
let's do it this way like you know I'm
running some kind of program and making
decisions and it's like no go this way
or hold it this way something like that
you feel it come out strained I think I
must have said like sorry 20 times in a
day in the live where you know my total
was not as it couldn't be I've had that
I had that strain but I just said sorry
immediately and it's just so funny
this is snappy we both had like I've
made a perspective on that and just
looking at that pattern just play out
and
it's something about you know and
processing it
having that buffer zone as much as
possible you know a lot of love and I
think we're all experiencing it you know
walking past houses and seeing someone
go out the door and the tone they're
taking with whoever they're talking to
inside is not so balanced and walking
past people on the street and it's
almost like a psychedelic experience
where you might get a festival of
something and it's at a certain stage of
the trip and you're looking around and
you're just seeing the emanation of
emotion on everyone's face it's like
they're almost wearing Greek masks of
despair at times much of that is a
projection often people get sad too in
it it can feel a little bit like that
walking along and seeing faces just
steeped in fear it has been like that at
least around where I've been and so with
all that with all that effect and
uncertainty it's you know it's
understandable we go through phases of
emotions so it seems to me having the
mental perspective the process through
it and and then it seems to be choice
there seems to be choice in in whether
you choose to once you once you can get
get that awareness is your turn then to
project outward the cause of it
to what degree can you take
responsibility for it while also having
compassion for their conditions and
yourself it's that it's not a clear
dance but it's something to be discerned
in individual cases
mm what's coming up there's like
attention I feel with I'm finding this
conversation very therapeutic right now
I'm just enjoying being here and you
know talking with you all and then
there's like there's a tension between
it's just the the therapeutic aspect but
then a desire to get really tactical
other things just talk about tactical
things are we wasting our time like you
know let's what do we do and then that
would the wisdom right it's like what is
the right what is the right the way
because they're both kind of good like
having a therapeutic conversation and
then having that kind of a tactical
mindset so that's the attention I'm
feeling right now and then the adjacent
adjacent thought to that was something
Collins I think tweeted was just
something about like I always wanted to
be Keegan five and now that I am like I
don't really care it's later so there's
something like that like you're you're
Keegan five ish or something no I didn't
I didn't claim my Keegan yeah yeah
that's that's it right and so when the
Keegan level you don't give a okay
cool evel's I think we're all that like
let's listen eyes I think that's the
level or that's the sense I get from
from us and there's a part of me that
like wishes you know like you guys were
my you know kinetic sense you guys are
my neighbors right because these
conversations are very therapeutic and I
can't have this with a lot of people on
the ground level here and so that's
another thought so that's a
understanding gratitude but there's
something here that can be leveraged I
think with this this tension I agree to
me that feeds back to this well it's in
touch with these themes about wisdom and
this it's like that's it that's
something
continue to aspire to I feel like
they'll never be I'll never be completed
at whatever that thing is I'll never
have arrived at wise precisely because
I'll be going home with myself and like
stubbing my toe get bad you know
like and so that notion of aspiration
that there's they said that there's a
that we don't have necessarily all of
the tools and we can't with each other
in person
for instance which I also agree would be
a wonderful thing we are facing these
limitations now and so the wisdom to me
would be would suggest well what tools
can we bring to bear and to what end or
how can we open use those tool tools to
open into possibilities beyond them so
we have the understanding that the local
level is so important for many people
the local level is not one they may be
able to engage with that much maybe they
can doesn't feel particularly community
in an apartment with slow moving lives
and you know many all around it feels
like if you're in lift with someone you
don't want to be in a lift at them
because you probably don't want to be in
a lift with them so how can we answer
just to add one one piece as well as ISA
on this religion it's been the therapy
and the tactics I think something's
taking place here which is there's two
additional elements taking place here
that might not be taking place as this
was perhaps just you and I peas are
having a conversation and wasn't even
recorded so of you know everyone here
only pizza I only have had
conversations with pizza before 1:00 and
so there's a sense in which we're
meeting each other for the first time
ago we are aware of each other and
there's the dance of tuning in to a
shared and resonance a shared language
at the Shedd frequency band supported
from which we could begin to be tactical
has to be dropped into this other piece
that what we're doing here because
there's a mindset that we may release
this for the benefit there is a modeling
of that process which is like an extra
level of of abstraction really although
not necessarily because if we are
gathering in community there will be
people there who are less able to open
into that space and need to see from
others there how they can hold
themselves and invite participation in
that shared voice too so it's a
beautiful question to feel into how
moving from that there are the tactics
because the therapy in some sense
anchors us in this sense of care what we
should be really caring about I'll be in
touch with that and then the tactics are
how should we make sense of how to
realize that which enables further care
to take place or or I don't think it's
all about care necessary that's a
crucial part but there's also you know
the curiosity and the exploration and
the courage to stride out and there's a
sense in which that's risk but there's
care for the whole so they're all
related
so there's some pieces I thought I just
throw into the mint hmm you know I I
feel like there's attack the tactician
in me I was wanting to systematize some
of this conversation
Peter you've invoked that and the
interesting thing here is that this
conversation we started from a place of
space and kind of contained many
perspectives and emotions and explored
how they connected and everything like
that and I feel like
the residents that was reached here was
because all of these things were part of
consideration and from my perspective I
see using these ways of experiencing as
a heuristic to see when you're in a
space is there a over resistance or a
blind spot that's that's present right
so some people might be with their gut
this sense of Terror of fear and one way
to do to do something with that is maybe
if they have some shame about it
reciprocating and allowing to have a
cathartic experience with them is
available if it doesn't feel like that
it's open we can start to include
something else you know and and you know
if fear is what comes from the gut then
love is what comes from the heart and
moving in that heart direction is
interesting if somebody is limited by
their ideological frame and can't move
outside of it maybe that means we pulled
them into their heart pull them into
their gut you know hey you guys what
you're alive and you better start doing
something you know these are they're you
know this this the mind state that is
very that were resistant to his
confusion so you know also bringing a
and okayness with confusion like yeah
that's totally normally confuse I'm
confused too so that we don't feel like
an ashamed of our emotional reactions
and trying to kind of in each space that
we interact broaden the perspective to
help include more parts of the picture
for the individuals or groups or whoever
it is it might be a something that's
coming to me so yeah you need to affirm
the heart affirm the gut and and the
mind or expand it or move somewhere else
or or be okay with the way it is yeah
there's there's a myriad of ways of
interacting with each of those those
basins so I have the believes
unfortunately but before I do
direction going off what you're offering
Jared direction I want to move in I
guess I would call grounded envisioning
and what I mean by that is you know
they're so you know there's expression
of feeling a little bit frustrated that
our media station a situation in a real
life in an immediate community you know
you know around us is not it's not like
they're not really first of all the
situation of the social distance
distancing doesn't help but at the same
time people just aren't consuming the
same media diets or have the same set of
memes in their mind of what needs to
happen and so I would I would offer that
we have to like wisdom is working on
multiple levels at once and one level I
think is trying to think in this time
now you know in in addition to just a
technical do I have enough calories to
last me for the next month which is
important
can I can i cultivate something
beautiful in myself my contempo to
practice whatever that might be in my
immediate relationships you know in my
environment you know can I can I grow
some plants for example or plant a
little garden you know that's small but
I think it's gesturing us towards a
longer-term grounding in you know this
isn't this is gonna keep happening and
it's just gonna get worse that's that's
my prediction you could you know and and
so I think we all need to think about
what is our five-year vision and for
example or two-year vision of what kind
of community we want to build and if we
can't build it where we are if it just
seems impossible then we should move
like we like we need to start developing
real logistical mutual aid communities
you know either where we are or
somewhere else and so there's like this
duel you know now it's like okay you
know let me prepare the ground for that
but then if this lets up how can I
orient my life to you know the next time
this happens which it will how will I be
in a in a better you know a situation to
to really live out my values right so I
think that's at least that's that's kind
of where I'm I'm at now
yeah what's um so I know you have to go
soon Jason so my kind of closing
thoughts and a couple things I got from
this conversation which I quite liked
one of them like you know the whole term
the meta-crisis I used to I loved that
term you know cuz it's like it felt so
compositionally like rich by the same
time it was like so disembodied you know
I had that kind of like that only meta
nerds with geek out about that term but
like the meta crisis has come online and
and it's like the thought that the meta
crisis coming online has awakened us
from the meaning crisis it's pretty cool
and the other thing about the whole kind
of tribalism it's like it's bifurcated
in my mind is that I might be leaving
Toronto soon to go up north the family
cottage and that's one place where I
want to build community with the people
there and with this kind of the spirit
of localism and how can we sustain a
community there but then there's just
this meta tribe that we have right here
and I think this is those like two
tribes forming and I feel like or I'd
like to be in touch with you guys and be
more close and feel as embodiment and
how can these two tribes like talk to
each other yeah yeah so that's what I'm
leaving with
you know I might just I might just add
to that real briefly I think in a way
that these two different worlds or
tribes can can bridge is I do think
developing these relationships online is
incredibly rich and credibly important
and I think by doing that we're we're
affording ourselves potential
opportunities to eventually create you
know the meatspace communities I can't
think of a good term in real life it
sounds bad meatspace sounds bad I'm just
recognizing how bad meets a sense yeah I
know
well I mean for calling it might be that
[Laughter]
we had last night with this with this
person about you know that harness you
know the erotic and like how do you lean
into the erotic so that's cool yeah
roads on fire yuck water you can
see the tantric find closing thoughts as
well
Karen : if afterwards you do the same
and we'll close there and that's just to
say you know thank you for being here
it's um I really appreciate it and I
think the dynamic pizza that you allude
to there the mental tribe the non the
non local tribe and then adjacent also
having this this realization and it's
one I very much share that movement
towards resiliency at a local level it
is so so important and
not sure how long that would take to
occur for for myself well in different
situations there when it comes to what
our local options are but it's certainly
I'm very much interested in yet I'm
interested also in this connection
between because we are local and
non-local it seems to me man the grenade
relationality the modes of orientation
in relationship perhaps are perhaps are
the same you know maybe we have
capacities to express with our body and
moving around although we could come and
do this with some Bluetooth headphones
and pace and talk to each other you know
no there are different limitations but
fundamentally when I am tuned in and go
back in to then come out process to me
feels the same whether I'm here with you
over a screen or whether I'm here with
you in person so yeah I really wish all
of you very well and all of our
listeners very well in their
preparations and solidifying themselves
to be of service to each other you know
thank you yeah thanks for setting this
up Tim and I just want to say you guys
have all added a lot of value to my life
mm-hmm like really top-notch content
really top-notch conversations big
inspirations for my own podcast and I
hope we can do drugs and dance together
someday so Colin I was perfect perfect
you got the tail in there one of the
common metaphors that we use is this the
the blind monks or whatever all feeling
the elephant right like the truth the
reality and each of them at a different
place and having a completely different
experience of what this elephant is and
the way that they investigate is
different the way that they share is
different and I kind of feel like these
conversations online are a lot of what
the doing is it's it's it's us yelling
at each other from the other side okay
it's also it looks like this over here
and and being like genuinely interested
in everybody's perspective because it's
like adding something to the picture and
that being said some people could jump
straight into there in a place where
they there's a lot of solidity not a lot
of movement and it's time for them to
get grounded in in a space in a locality
and some people might be in a place
that's moving and changing but that
doesn't mean that they can't lend to the
generation the triangulation of what
we're doing here so yeah I had employed
everybody to kind of try to find the
ways to be useful and it will be
different for all of us and we all are
supporting each other in the process as
well you know you're the listeners of
our podcasts like if we didn't have
people engaging and asking questions and
driving narratives and making donations
and stuff like that like I'm sure these
projects would have fallen apart quite
quickly and so there's there's so many
roles to be played and you know we need
R&D labs and those can be virtual and
and we need gardens and then those
cannot
so try and try and bring it all together
and yeah you guys make me very
optimistic the outcome of humanity so
cheers Cheers thank you thank you
okay bigger way guys whether you're
watching on YouTube or listening as a
podcast remember to subscribe and hit
the bell to track upcoming releases