[Music]
so we've covered the IDW the
intellectual diet web quite a lot on the
channel and one of the most entertaining
subplots on Twitter for the last couple
of months has been Travis Pangburn
Pangburn philosophy and their gradual
and very public implosion and it's
finally reached a kind of inevitable
ending earlier I think yesterday or
earlier today where Pangburn has
actually folded so we're going to do a
quick recap of the whole history of
penguin for people who aren't aware of
it and how it's been the gift that keeps
on giving on Twitter for those who can't
look away from car crash moments so
Pangburn starts penguin sort of
obviously saw the opportunity with the
kind of the big big following of Jordan
Peterson Sam Harris and some of the
other IDW members took a big leap put on
these big events including obviously the
the big vancouver debate between sam
harris and Jordan Peterson and the big
London Dublin events as well that
included the Vancouver ones included
Brett Weinstein and the London want
included Douglas Murray and fair play
they were very big events it was sort of
stadium gigs for intellectuals brilliant
kind of it was certainly a big idea that
they had and possibly too big and but
then from there they went out they did
some big conferences in or announcement
big competence in Australia Melbourne
and Sydney I think and Auckland and then
they cancelled the Auckland one and then
for a long but didn't as far as I can
tell didn't refund a large number of the
people who bought tickets in Auckland
and didn't pay a lot of the speakers
for a lot of the Australia work and then
this just became this this incredible
public relations disaster on Twitter
because Travis Pangburn
seems like the least self-aware guy on
Twitter so he kept up all of these kind
of all of these postings and everyone
was just commenting and work commenting
why wouldn't you pay people back when
you're gonna pay people back it's just
this crazy dumpster fire online probably
the most yeah the most sustained
negative public relations disaster that
I've I think I've ever seen because then
he would then he was getting into public
Twitter discussions with people like
Eric Weinstein Sam Harris trying to
blame them for pulling out of his event
even though it was quite clear that he
still owed a lot of people money and
even now so there was this there's this
conference supposed to be coming up in
New York or the day of reflection it is
a wonderful wonderful name Travis add a
reflection maybe maybe there's a message
there maybe your subconscious has sent
you a message a day of reflection maybe
you should take one this day of
reflection originally had a whole host
of like big IDW names one by one they
pulled out and it got poorer and poorer
they were initially charging $500 for
the tickets so a lot of irate people
wanting their money back because they
they paid to see people who were no
longer going to be part of it do all the
Petersons pulled out so M Harris pulled
out eventually pretty much everyone
pulled out now it's been canceled and as
it's been canceled
Travis Pangburn has now officially
folded Pangburn philosophy and even the
statement they released yesterday pretty
much blamed the speakers for the events
that have unfolded it's it's pretty
astonishing Ali you used to work in
marketing yeah well I used to work in
marketing and I also used to work in one
of the if not the best events agency in
the world Jack Gordon worldwide so I've
been watching this with ya maybe a bit
if eclis not so much for the people who
lost their money that's really sucks and
I feel
for them but mainly just it is car crash
TV it is like watching a slow car crash
on Twitter so yeah and I don't quite
know where to begin I mean I think this
whole collapse is and also his attitude
and his kind of blaming it for a long
time it's been the the behavior of a man
who's in panic mode because he knows he
screwed and so it's it's almost had this
feeling for me of like inevitability I
mean also just so unprofessional
the way he's done it you just never do
that just having these public spats and
this is lack of personal responsibility
and integrity so there's all of that am
I thinking on where he went wrong
strategically is a we know from behind
the scenes sources that his marketing
strategy was effectively hey guys if
you're speaking tweeted out and I think
there may be were there's a little bit
of digital marketing but not much more
whereas with people of that profile
could have done radio interviews could
have done maybe not billboards
necessarily but there are a lot of other
marketing channels you could go to you
with that wouldn't be difficult so
there's that and then also just
apparently the production values were
quite low it was kind of a stage some
chairs and when you're putting on an
event of that scale and that kind of
with that level of people on stage if
we've been doing it at Jack Morton for
example a lot more would have gone into
the actual production you would have you
know we would have made it a you know an
experience in a different way than it
sounds like he did and the other thing
as well mystery I used to be a
journalist public relations battle like
101 is a is admit your mistakes it's and
what's fascinating as well is that
because we've seen on Twitter and
Facebook and everywhere else he's been
getting that kind of feedback from
people every time he's tweeted people
have just been saying look man just fess
up say you say you made a mistake pay
the money back and take your lessons and
that's what's really infuriated people
is that he's failed on every count to
accept responsibility for these
and accept that just it just to
apologize and that in in the Internet
age in particular when there's kind of
full accountability and there's nowhere
to hide that's the one thing I just
don't see how you get at home there's no
alternative to that yeah and my theory
just a theory on why partly why he did
that I don't know him as a person so it
could be an aspect of his personality
but I do know the venues that he was
doing it and I've been to those venues
I've actually met the you know the venue
team at places like the o2 and it is
they're not cheap and also when you're
doing an event in a foreign country
which for him a lot of them were you
have to work with foreign suppliers and
that is always a tricky thing because
you don't know generally you don't know
am I getting the best price a big part
of putting on an event is getting the
best prices from your suppliers and I
can just envisage that he really lost I
mean he thought he was losing a lot more
money than he was making in in certain
situations you know things just add up
massively and venues like the o2 are
huge and they're very expensive so point
being what I think happened is that
people were like hey just fess up give
the money back I think he was like I
don't have it what it feels like as well
is that he brought a very
twentieth-century
extraction model to a 21st century
phenomenon the thing about John Peterson
in particular but also the intellectual
darkweb is it an emergent phenomenon and
it's an emergent phenomenon out of the
Internet age and in the internet age
there are certain expectations about the
way that things should be done
transparency being absolutely key and
there's been very little to transparency
what's been interesting as well after
all of this has happened Eric Weinstein
has been spending all of his breaks and
all of his time talking to people on
Twitter getting gathering their details
potentially for a class-action suit who
knows but at least put pressure on
penguin to refund people like the IDW
members realize what a kind of public
relations disaster this is because it
reflects on them a lot of the people who
bought tickets don't necessarily know
that it's it's not their responsibility
and the point about this as well I think
there was a massive missed opportunity
if I look back to the Jordan Peterson
sam Harris events those had the
potential to be cultural touchstone
moments and the way to do that I think
would have been to livestream them would
have been to create a buzz around them
there's a huge audience of people who
followed Jordan Peterson sam Harris and
I think there was a real sense of this
extractive model that Travis was
bringing so I'm gonna film them but I'm
gonna release them to patrons only it's
going to take a long time for me to do
that and just trying to extract all the
value out of it the audience that have
built up around Sam Harris and Jordan
Peterson all have come there because
their content was free most of their
content was put out for free and then to
impose this model on it that tries to
extract just felt really wrong felt
exploitative felt like it was it was
breaking an unspoken contract with both
Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson's
audience and I think both of them
actually had quite a bit of pushback
from their own audience because of that
as well the way to do it I think I know
you agree and we've spoken with a few
other people about this was to a live
stream them make them a cultural moment
everyone everyone's eyes are on if
you've got enough people watching
there's other ways there's YouTube super
chat there's other ways that you can
monetize that maybe it's it's free while
you watch it then to watch it afterwards
you have to pay but there was a chance
to get the eyes of the world onto this
onto this debate and by the time that
the recordings came out especially the
Sam Harris Jordan Peterson I didn't even
watch them I was I was kind of I would
have definitely watched all the debates
live but I didn't watch them when
they've been released because the moment
had gone you know as you're saying that
another thing comes up as just this kind
of missed opportunity to build community
within all the different people who are
fans of or interested in the IDW because
that there is this kind of everything
became quite insular with that model as
well as like you go to the event and
then months later you get the content if
you paid for it that there's a huge
groundswell of people who want to meet
each other and talk about this and
introduce it to their friends
and be able to have that cultural moment
where they can be like hey this you know
people have heard about it in the
mainstream again part of its tactics
part of it is just the attitude of like
not using the broadcast model but using
this ground-up model and that's that
makes me almost sad thinking about it
because I know how much energy is there
yeah because in the events that we've
done giving people the chance to to talk
about some of these ideas there's a real
sense of relief people are people are
desperate to have free spaces to express
things that maybe they don't feel able
to express at work or they don't feel
able to express in their groups of
friends and that's that's what's fueling
the IDW phenomenon so how do you take
the conversations that are being had in
public by the high profile figures and
give the opportunity for people to join
in that conversation yeah and I was just
sick just to add to that it's it's a big
part of the IDW is how to have
conversations in public and that urge a
there's the urge of just like Goddard's
want to be able to express myself but we
all want to know how to have
conversations in public we all want to
practice having conversations in public
so really it should be a I don't know if
Democratic is the right word but a much
more of a back and forth and there's so
much potential in that I think so I
think what we're saying is that this
this is an emergent conversation the IDW
is part of it but it's all facilitated
by the internet it's emerging naturally
and it needs to be treated like an
emergent phenomenon I think
live-streaming is as we've talked about
helping other people to join there's a
huge amount of goodwill as well like
there's a lot of people since we've been
starting doing what we've done we've
heard a lot of people offer their help
to us in kind of web design and graphic
design and stuff like that which has
been fantastic really helpful I think
when people recognize what the people in
the IDW are trying to do the kind of
conversations they're trying to have and
the stakes the fact that these are the
essential conversations that need to be
had right now there's a huge amount of
goodwill and a huge amount of desire to
help and then I think your if you can
tap into that tap into making it a
cultural moment engaging people
then you've got a chance of really
shifting the culture and I think it
obviously needs a curation strategy that
recognizes the moment that we're in and
I think it's fair to say that Pangburn
philosophy wasn't the right one there's
a phrase that we have an England called
 the bed Pangburn shat the bed
[Music]
you
[Music]