[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis so last time we looked in
depth at Corbin and Yonge and tried to
draw very deeply the notion of the
relationship to the sacred second self I
launched into sort of a critical sort of
mutual criticism between Corbin and
Yonge and brought in some Buber along
the way and then I pointed to somebody
whose work also deriving from Heidegger
integrates aspects of all of these
together and kind of a profound way
Tillich is deeply influenced and aware
of what he calls depth psychology the
kind of psychology and Jung of course is
deeply aware of Heidegger I don't know I
don't think that Tillich was aware of
Corbin but he is deeply aware of the
symbol of the symbol in an imaginal Wow
there than in a merely imaginary way
Tillich takes the meaning crisis
seriously he writes perhaps his most
well known and I think it's a
masterpiece book the courage to be as a
response to the meaning crisis like Jung
and Corbin and for very related reasons
he's deeply critical of literalism and
fundamentalism throughout but he takes
it deeper as I mentioned he really
deepens it in terms of Heidegger's
critique of Anto theology and he becomes
critical of live literalism and
fundamentalisms as forms of idolatry in
which we are attempting to have right
rather than become so there's some
excellent books on the relationship
between Jung and Tillich this is a
series of ongoing work by John doar Lee
I recommend two books to you the psyche
is sacrament which I tweeted about in my
book recommendations
I was also represent his later book Paul
Tillich Carl Jung and the recovery of
religion but make no mistake Dooley is
not talking about a recovery in a
nostalgic sense he writes another book
called strategy for a loss of faith
where he is trying to get beyond
classical theism and so I recommend
Early's work as a comprehensive way of
bringing about a deep dialog and a kind
of integration between Jung and Tillich
okay so Tillich say is the main response
to the meeting crisis and here's how
Tillich is not just theorizing he is
trying to give us guidance on how to
live and let's remember that this is
written really matters because of you
know the way Tillich resisted the Nazis
because what Tillich talks about in the
courage to be is courage now he's
careful to note that this is a kind of
existential courage that ultimately
allows us to confront and overcome
meaninglessness in its depth but also of
course to more practically responds
respond to you know perverted responses
to the meaning crisis itself like Nazism
and it's Gnostic nightmare this process
of encouragement now he is like
Aristotle he's talking about he's not
talking about something as simple as
just bravery facing danger or fortitude
the ability to endure no for Tillich
courage is a virtue there's something of
wisdom in Courage Courage's involves
with it within it what that central
feature of wisdom which is seeing
through allusion into reality the brave
person faces danger but that's all we
can say about them the person with
fortitude endures difficulty but that's
all we can say of them the courageous
person sees through the illusion and the
distortion of fear or distress to what
is truly good and acts accordingly
so that what is this seeing through and
how does it help us confront the meaning
crisis so this notion of seeing through
seeing to the depths as telic often says
right his Tillich's is related to
Tillich's notion of faith and he notice
how we're circling back around and this
isn't really a circle because Tillich's
notion of faith is not the assertion of
propositions to believe believed he is
circling back right to the ancient
Israelite Hebrew notion of the auth and
now we can add that that participatory
knowing in a course of being is an
aspirational process Tillich understands
faith as ultimate concern that which
concerns us ultimately his notion of
idolatry is to treat something that
could be a symbolic icon through which
you expect you articulate and develop
your ultimate concern you transform that
into a Idol an object to have and
possess to control and manipulate and
you thereby are using the machinery that
it's appropriate for ultimate concern
for something that it is not ultimate
what is ultimate concern what is concern
well when you're concerned about
something you care about it but you're
also coping with it you're committed to
it you're involved in it it encompasses
you even though you are being in right
being involved in and through it it is
deeply perspectival and participatory
that's what he's trying to get at and it
is aspirational and it is open-ended
it points towards the inexhaustible
nassif being
so of course this Tillich's notion is
directed at hydrators notion of design
right this concern this right that
design is the being whose being is in
question and therefore right by a
participatory our perspective of
participatory knowing of our being we
come into deeper contact but remember
for Heidegger that requires a deep
remembering an overcoming of our
forgetfulness and Alafaya we have to
have the ontological wonder towards the
ground of meaning the ground of being
this leads right into Tillich's notion
of God which right I'm going to try and
propose to you is transgressive of
classical theism in important ways
without it being identifiable with
atheism in important ways
so Tillich understands God as an icon as
opposed to an idol as an imaginal symbol
for the ground of being God symbolizes
the ground of being and therefore God is
no kind of being there is a no thingness
to God God is no kind of thing in any
attempt to reify to think of God as a
thing is for Tillich a form of idolatry
so here's what I'm trying to get you to
see what Tillich means
here's meaning right and here's reality
and here's the relationship between them
God is the simultaneous grounding of all
of these you can see the influence of
Heidegger here right
God is the ground of the meaning making
of reality and of the relationship
between them and any attempt to limit
God
any one of these three athletes three
components just to the meaning just to
the reality just to the relationship
between them is for Tillich a profound
kind of idolatry this is why literalism
and fundamentalism are so pernicious to
him so ultimate concern if we allow
ourselves to truly come into question
and quest in a wandering way if we
participate in right an aspirational
trajectory motivated by ultimate concern
this puts us into a resonant
relationship this gets to what is known
as Tillich's method of correlation this
is how he saw himself doing theology I
know it's kind of odd for right a you
know naturalistic cognitive scientists
to be talking about theology again but I
I think we've gotten to a place where
that seems to you as a viable and
valuable thing to do what's the method
of correlation that there is always this
ongoing tonus this polar tension which
we talked about earlier between
existential questioning understood as
existential questing and what till it
calls revelation the way the depths of
reality reveal themselves
so these are always resonating with each
other
the revelation right has to fit the
existential questioning but the s
existential questioning has to fit
itself so there's a mutual dynamic
fitted fitting fitted nurse going on no
that's not I wanted that's that's I want
to get a verbal rather than an adjective
oh yeah there is an ongoing resident
resident fitting right mutual fitting
togetherness of the existential
questioning and the revelation you can
see how this is very similar to or to an
agog a I think one of the problems that
Allah I see in a lot of interpreters of
Tillich and I've read quite a few is
that this method has been this
correlational method has been
misunderstood as just propositional
theology that this is all about you know
propositional proposals there's no word
proposition propositional proposals and
then what we get are we get other
propositions from the sacred text the
Bible and what we're doing is we're
putting right the propositions of
theology into concordance with the
propositions of the Bible and I think
that's to fundamentally trivialize
Tillich to not get at the depths the
existential depths of the method of
correlation I want to propose a
different way of understanding that that
picks up on the tone ours and takes us
towards God as the ground of being as
I've represented it to you and this is
the language Tillich's use
Tillich talks about the depths of reason
this is the Neal put that this is a
platonic notion that which makes
reasoning possible it's all the
relevance realization machinery I would
argue the recursive machinery of
rationality the aspirational rationality
the color talks about all those things
the depths of reason and Tillich talks
about that right we haven't
static relationship ecstasy wait when
the depths of our reason we're standing
beyond ourselves it's it's it's the
depths of their psyche but not just in
the psychological way that young means
but also the depths of the the grounding
depths of our rationality and then what
stands between is a symbol in Corbin's
imaginal sense until it is so clear
about that right the symbol to the
depths of reality so in the psyche the
depths right of reason are experienced
as ex stasis self transcendence moving
beyond myself right so crucial right to
aspiration genuine self genuine self
genuine transcendence in genuine self
transcendence the depths of reality
Tillich talks about he uses two words
here he uses sometimes he uses the word
miracle and this is probably like I know
for me that's like oh no oh right and
that's like angel because this looks
like magic in the pejorative sense of
the word he also talks about it as
mystery I think there's two ways using
some Heidegger which I it's fair because
of the heart a garyun influence on
Tillich on it we can think of miracle as
that aspect of being that we've talked
about as the shining and we can talk
about their mystery as that aspect we've
talked about as right the withdrawal
into the more Ness the combinatorial
explosive depths of reality and of
course I've tried to argue through
Heidegger and through Corbin but
especially through Heidegger how these
two are inter a four dig in our sense of
realness and then the idea the method of
correlation is basically as I suggested
to you the an agog a between the ex
stasis as we resonate with the depths
the grounding and formative
depths of reason are resonating with the
grounding informative depths of realness
and they are anagogical e-cycling
together so you've heard all of this
before but let's quickly repeat it for
Tillich the symbol is much more than a
sign Chris Master Pietro in his first
discussion with me brought this out
excellently and that is clearly the case
in Tillich the symbols are participatory
symbol the symbol opens up levels of
reality otherwise closed to us the
symbol opens up levels of ourselves
otherwise close to us and it does this
in a mutually affording resonant fashion
symbols are not made by us and this of
course we've something we've talked
about before and we suit we'll see it
come out when we get to Barfield they
are self-organizing and they grow out of
the unconscious within us and the
unconscious without us symbols have a
life they can die they can be born they
can live they can die Tillich worries
that many of the symbols in Christianity
are dying and that fundamentalism and
literalism are an inappropriate way of
trying to hold on to them and keep them
alive rather than affording the rebirth
sorry that they have that that's the
wrong with affording the new birth of a
new symbol that brings back the
relationship the resonant relationship
that the old symbol possessed perhaps
this is what Jonathan pazzo means when
he feels that Christianity in the
meaning crisis is going through a
profound death and rebirth of its
symbolic structure rhetoric symbols have
a surplus of meaning there is a more
Ness to them if they're not resonating
with mourners they're not symbols they
have a numinous character grounded in
the resonant depth of mind and reality
and therefore symbols are deeply
transformative they're deeply trans
Jerry
Billy transyl Lucent etc etc so this is
why correlation is not just
propositional theology if you're not
going undergoing a profound
transformation you're not doing
Tillich's correlational method so how
does this transform relation how's it
realized symbolically it's realized
symbolically and and you're gonna see
okay how is all of this rep how is it
realized by you both senses of the word
realized taken into your frame but also
actualized in reality how is this
transformative power of the symbol
realized it's realized in the
relationship between the existential
self and the essential self and you see
what's coming here this is the
relationship to the relationship of the
current self the self in existence to
the sacred second self the essential
self is the self in the fullness of
being this member of Plato's allegory
the self in its fullness of being that
is capable of recognizing through
conformity the fullness of being in the
world this relationship that Tillich is
pointing to use we can use language
we've carefully worked out together this
relationship between the existential
self and the essential self is
aspirational Tillich repeat like he
repeatedly talks about how the essential
self is ahead of course it's not
causally ahead normatively ahead the
essential self is ahead not causally but
normatively it's ahead of the
existential self the essential self
beckons the existential self towards
fulfillment it's constantly tempting if
you'll allow me this language the
existential self
- a better way of being it's crying to
tempt it out of the world in which it
might be existentially trapped this is
the gnosis within Tillich so the sacred
second self and for Tillich this is
bound up with like you know when Saint
Paul is talking about you know the old I
used remember when we talked about agape
and I used to be this way I acted like a
kid and now here's the new way I act
like a man this is the way of agape so
my salience landscape is softer son it
naturally self-organizes to constantly
tempt me towards the good until I quote
a very excellent little book on agape I
highly recommend it to you so this
aspirational transformative journey of
encouragement literally embodying
courage encouragement and right
encouragement gets us to confront
seriously meaninglessness now what in
the courage to be till it goes through
various historical developments in the
ancient world the meaningless is
confronted in our being as the finitude
of our being and he talks about how the
Stoics responded to that and then he
talks about during the write during the
Christian period and especially during
the Protestant Reformation right because
Tillich is deeply influenced by
Lutheranism in a very critical way
though of course and the meaningless is
confronted within ourselves knowing as
guilt and he talks about the Protestant
Reformation as an attempt to seriously
respond to the issue of guilt and then
now in our current period right we are
experiencing meaninglessness in ourself
as despair and we he represents that he
says that is being represented by the
existentialists of course Heidegger
sorry Tillich is writing in the period
of the 50s and the 60s when
existentialism was still more prevalent
we of course can talk about things
following on existentialism if we had
more time
like post-modernism and other things
that are right our represent not
representing us I'm gonna reward
discussing and articulating a deeper way
in which we are embodying the meaning
crisis but nevertheless you can follow
this trajectory through the courage to
be you beat and go through right you can
go through the Stoics you can go through
the Protestant Christians you can go
into the existentialist and this
trajectory leads us to a position beyond
all three the position that Tillich is
arguing for which which he calls the
response to faith remember faith is daf
for Tillich it is not the willful
assertion of belief and here's the thing
and this is why I dolla tree is so
pernicious for Tillich the no thingness
of God coming to really encounter the no
thickness of God is central to this
notion of faith there no thickness of
God takes into itself the no thingness
right so no that's what I sort of
misspoke there no thickness let me
change how I'm pronouncing these terms
because it will help the no thickness of
God takes into itself the nothingness of
meaninglessness and it overcomes it the
no thickness of God has a transformative
power over the nothingness of despair so
this is the notion of a fundamental
aspect identity shift and here's where
if I had time and I'll bring it out when
I get into this other series I would
talk about nishitani because his book of
religion and nothingness is an extended
philosophical profound examination of
this fundamental aspect shift identity
shift remember what an aspect shift is
remember the Necker cube right you're
looking at something and the thing
doesn't change but the aspect by which
you're seeing it changes it flips and uh
and what's salient what's foreground and
background but this isn't just a shift
of aspect that's why I'm creating this
neologism right it's an aspect identity
shift
what does it mean you come to see the no
thingness of God you come to experience
it as the inexhaustible creation of
meaning it is an inexhaustible fount of
meaning cultivation it is the ground of
meaning intelligibility the relationship
between them etc for for Tillich
nishitani thinks the same thing can be
found within Buddhism that when we
deeply realize the no thickness of
Shunyata when we participate it when we
identify with it we gain the competence
the ability to aspect shift the
nothingness of meaninglessness so that
we come to see it instead as pointing to
its ground which is an inexhaustible
source of meaning cultivation that
cannot be drained dry by our despair
there is a fecundity at the level of
fundamental framing and the way it's
coupled to being that cannot be drained
dry by despair when we stop trying to
push away than nothingness but have
instead an imaginary relationship to it
and move through it and agog eclis in an
imaginal fashion with the nothingness of
God then we overcome meaninglessness we
overcome meaninglessness Nietzsche
bumped up against this right he got
close to it if you stare long enough
into the abyss it begins to stare long
enough into you but you know what he
didn't do he didn't stare long enough
he didn't look deeply enough that's
nicer Tony's critique of Nietzsche and
nihilism
this fundamental aspect shift in which
the nothingness of despair is
transformed into the revelation of no
thingness as inexhaustible being meaning
this takes and until it talks about the
mystical tradition there's a term from
gregory of nyssa when the eastern
orthodox Neoplatonic
tradition and you see it also in john
SCOTUS era Jena Wright picks it up this
notion of epic TASIS epic TASIS which is
such a cool sounding word it sounds so
cool anyways so this is the idea so
there's a sort of standard I suppose you
might call it a teleological model of
sort of salvation right where the point
is you know I'm moving towards a final
destination the promised land within
which I will see God and I will come to
rest in the promised land so you know
the whole point of a purpose is right
that it itself dissolves when I've
achieved my purpose I've realized my
goal then the pursuit has ended but
Gregory of Nyssa and Regina have this
different notion of epic stasis so here
you're not trying to rest in God God has
not ultimately had even in resting in
him instead what you what the human
being is engaging in now for them
there's a myth also if this continues on
after your death in a life after death
and I'll put that aside but nevertheless
the notion here of infinite self
transcendence in the infinity of God
right there is no resting there is only
the constant the constant disclosure of
the inexhaustible Ness
the ground of being the transductive 'ti
in the trans framing never stopped they
never stop so the method of correlation
and the encourage encouragement are
therefore are emphasized as trans gentle
ik explicitly and repeatedly argues that
the symbol joins together and grounds it
joins together but also grounds the
subjective and the object if he talks
about how even Nietzsche uses this in
the notion of will to power Nietzsche in
his notion of will to power is trying to
use something that is right has a
subjective meaning will but also like
the will to power power in existence the
way everything is sort of right like
Spinoza's kinetise like pushing itself
and maintaining itself in existence he's
trying to get something that bridges
between the subjective and the objective
and this is one of the ways in which
therefore Tillich is different than
young and there's criticism in Tillich
of young also appreciation of young
right Tillich sees of course the process
of individuation very similar to the way
young does and and this right this is
perhaps the more subjective side of this
symbolic imaginal relationship but
Tillich always and this is the tonus
again always puts that into creative
tension with participation not just in
groups although he's not excluding that
but this is your participation in being
and he relates that to and this is
really interesting
neither the autonomy of being sorry
that's wrong wrong we're autonomy of
reason emphasized in the Enlightenment
nor what he calls right a hetero enter
Oh
normos or sometimes he even uses the the
more religious term the demonic in
position of authority without from
without and see how this just so
beautifully lines up with the problem of
aspiration right remember it it it's
it's it can't be something that just
slams you from the outside that you
passively receive it can't be something
that you just autonomy autonomously make
or you don't actually get genuine self
creation or what I would call self
transcendence Tillich sees this overcome
and what he calls a Fionna muss which
literally means God ordered God governed
but of course God here means the ground
of being the ongoing epic thesis of the
inexhaustible the affordance right of
ongoing transfer aiming so what we see
here is is transductive 'ti the sacred
second self we see the anti Gaga ascent
joining reason and revelation together
and the fundamental aspect shift the
deep criticism of fundamentalism and
literalism and there is of course
therefore something that is deeply about
gnosis and the connection to narcissism
and the transgression of theory of
theism is explicit in Tillich
Tillich talks about this whole process
and this is why I qualified so much the
use of the word the anima s' he
qualifies this whole process as the
process in which we are responding
deeply to the meaning crisis he calls
this as a realization of the God beyond
the god of theism the God beyond the God
of theism which is a deeply
transgressive statement
it's very Gnostic in the sense of seeing
God as that which is the Demiurge in
trapping us with in existential
entrapment the existential entrapment of
the meaning crisis this whole process is
so transitive and so transformative in
nature that and it is so deeply
resistant to literalism fundamentalism
and idolatry that it is going to take us
to the God beyond the god of theism this
is the non theism of Tillich non-theism
is a position that tries to transcend
theism and atheism many people are
talking about it now there's related
ideas like an athlete and Athleta ISM
which is sort of the kind of theism that
you get after going through atheism I
think this is a better way of talking
about it on theism non-theism is the
correct and appropriate way as I've
already mentioned to talking about
religions like Buddhism and Taoism
non-theism is the rejection of the
prompt the presuppositions that are
shared by both theism and atheism I will
go into this in much greater detail in
another series let me just give you and
this is not an exhaustive list it is
just a preliminary list but nevertheless
I think a good starting point what are
the what afford what are for shared
presuppositions between the classical
theists and the atheist number one God
is the Supreme Being the theist accepts
that gives a yes to
and the atheist gives a no to it but
they both accept that proposition as the
one they are debating about the
non-theist rejects that number two God
is accessed primarily or even solely
through belief the theist and the
atheist agreed to this they just
disagree about whether or not there's
really any access to be found the non PS
reject both of these number three
theology or anti theology which is what
atheism often engages in although I'm
not equate again theism to anti theology
but theology and anti theology do not
require transformative and agog a all
you need to do is have possession of the
propositions and be able to infer the
right the correct implications thereby
losing everything that we've been
talking about in these last four episode
the theists and the atheists agree with
that proposition the non-theist rejects
it
number four sacredness is personal or
impersonal do the theists and the
atheist disagree about how to write
which one of those two pick the theists
says it's personal the atheist says it's
impersonal I agree that right trying to
say that the atheist has nothing that
functions like sacredness in their life
does it just does not sit with their
performative existence well but I do
agree when the atheist says that they do
not share the theist notion of
sacredness as something fundamentally
personal the non-theist rejects that the
non-theist rejects that sacredness is
personal or impersonal rather because if
the non-theist rejects the Cartesian
grammar that drives it the non theists
argues that sacredness is trans Jerry
it is aspirational this is what Tillich
was going on about my main criticism of
Tillich is although in one way he's way
more practical than Heidegger he's
giving us guidance on how to live how to
cultivate courage and faith he does not
offer practices of transformation see
Jung actually created a practice
intrapsychic though it might be he
created a practice for enacting and
cultivating the imaginal he created
active imagination which is not just to
in an imaginary sense call up images
it's not just to conceptually think
about things it's to allow images to
self organize in an auto poetic fashion
such that the depths of the psyche are
revealed so that the self and the ego
can talk to each other
Jung creates a practice of active
imagination he creates a practice of
dream interpretation and that is sadly
missing until it
Killick is better than Heidegger I would
argue and until it gives us a way to
live courage and faith deeply
reinterpret it but he does not give us
the processes that Jung gives us this
notion of deep symbolic participation
that is translated into practices I
think goes to the heart of Owen Barr
fields work so Barfield is one of the
Inklings he is part of the ongoing
discussion and fellowship between
Tolkien and CS Lewis of course Barfield
Charles Williams those are the core four
and then a bunch of other people I would
recommend three books to try and get a
better sense of Barfield lost knowledge
of the imagination by Lachman which I've
already recommended to you the
fellowship the literary lives of the
Inklings and there's that word inkling
again the literary lives of the Inklings
by Phillips olives he and
I was at Carroll Zaleski there's the
Tuesday less keys anyways that's a very
good book and then the book I would most
heartily recommend it's a book that I'm
finding brilliant is the book oh and
Barfield philosophy poetry and theology
by defensa all of this will come up of
course on the panels
so a couple of things Barfield is
definitely influenced by Gnosticism
narcissus and he's influenced by Rudolf
Steiner and I won't go into it you can
read the book in depth Steiner has like
I either say too little or too much
about Steiner it's it's a mystery to
many people myself included why Barfield
was so taken with Steiner and saw
thought so highly of him but if you
reinterpret Steiner as basically a
modern Gnostic who's generating a
gnostic mythology the two worlds and the
divine spark and all this kind of stuff
then you understand perhaps why Barfield
was so enamored with Steiner I think
Steiner was the vehicle whereby
Gnosticism comes into Barr fields
thinking so Barfield is therefore
influenced by gnosis he's influenced by
Neoplatonism through Coolridge there are
romantic philosophy also engages in some
important philosophy the few CI makes
very clear this is one of the most
profound parts of the book the deep
indebtedness that Coolidge had to the
early romantics or the post contents
people that follow Conte and go on a
different path from the later romantics
and Hegel so a prototypical figure here
from the these early romantics or post
contents is somebody like Schlegel and
what the what the what these early
romantics emphasized is they emphasized
the Infiniti the Infiniti of reality
this is really interesting I find it so
infinity right when I'm trying to get
the non finiteness the the lack of being
bound being fully frame herbal rather
than just being uncountable although I'm
alluding of course again to
combinatorial explosion so they
emphasize the infinity of reality and
and and and this term is used by them
and by Judy fierce fuchsia and is an
examination of own Barfield this is the
inexhaustible Ness the inexhaustible
more Ness and the I and the idea is that
the inexhaustible more Ness is that
which continually draws us constantly
draws us and affords us into self
transcendence that inexhaustible more
nests so Slagle had a way of putting
this the finite longing for the infinite
the finite longing for the infinite it
is this adduction I'm using this word to
draw out right
which of course was became our word edge
ucation which if we think of education
aspirationally is fine the way keller
does it is this adduction that discloses
or reveals the sacredness
so our transductive 'ti our finite are
our app right right there's here the
right there's an epic thesis our epic
static right trajectory our law our
finite are always finite are always
framed longing for that trance framing
that discloses but never completely
discloses the combinatorially explosive
inexhaustible more nests of reality and
simultaneously discloses the ongoing
capacity of relevance realization to
adapt to that in a coupled manner we
experience and we participate I'm using
this as a as a transitive verb we
experience and participate this in
creativity not creativity just in the
sense of making but the creativity in
like that you experience in the flow
State
see what how this is different from the
later romantics this is not being a this
is not to find the contact and realness
in some irrational locus in the psyche
or in Hegel as the dialectic of a system
a propositional system but instead it's
defined sacredness in the flow of
self-transcendence within creativity and
this is what is meant by poesis what we
translate as poetry
Barfield picks up on this police Asst as
ex stasis and creativity the way we
stand beyond ourselves in creativity and
he's very clear about how this is right
it's a transformative experience there's
a felt change in consciousness their
self after is both continuous and
discontinuous from the self before the
transformative experience all that stuff
we've been talking about with the sacred
second self and aspiration there's an ex
TASIS within the creative there's an ex
faceis in creativity there's a next asus
and creativity found within poetry and
the poetical aspects of everyday
language that can reawaken us to this
kind of connectedness to the
inexhaustible Ness I connected
aesthetics periences it as sacredness
so
Barfield looks at words the etymology
the history of words and I touched on
this briefly earlier when I was talking
about symbols and I had I made some sort
of criticisms of Barfield which I noted
at the time were preliminary and promise
airy and I promise to come back to them
in more depth as a way of trying to both
defend my criticism but also to defend a
deeper reading of Barfield so you
remember the idea here is we have a word
like Numa the Greek or spiritus and
Barfield nodes if you go fur and for us
write it right so for the Greeks or for
the Latins or the Romans for spiritus it
can mean both wind or what we now think
of the word spirit sort of the self
moving aspects of the psyche
and we divide it into right spirit is
this
we really don't can't see it that way
but there's a division here and for
Barfield this division replicates the
sort of cartesian division between the
objective world of like wind and the
subjective world of what's going on in
the psyche in its self movement or its
self contact but what Barfield says is
when you go back there isn't this right
these terms are used and they're treated
as if they have a kind of identity what
I would argue is a non logical identity
but and-and-and but they're not they
interpenetrate they inter afford each
other these these meetings that we see
as so antithetical so disjunctive with
respect to each other for Barfield
people in who used the word that way
were engaged in a form of participation
this is a way of being before the
division before the Cartesian
disjunction I would argue that what
Barfield is pointing to is that these
people had a more trans jecht Avanigadda
resonance with reality so that the wind
is imaginal for them in that it
discloses the self moving aspects of
reality and themselves in a highly
resonant fashion the reason i want to
say that is because i'm not quite sure
about his evolutionary hypothesis I
pointed to the work of Lake often
Johnson that show we we unlike the
people of the ancient past we use
language in this fashion
a way that is pervasive through all of
our cognition and speech words have
these dual meanings and inner and outer
meaning I pointed to work that I've
published on and the work that they've
published on how we use the word attack
there's many examples this is only one
that's the point there's many many of
these examples we use the word attack
and we mean right physic
all right physical destruction like I
attack the castle at least the intent
intent to physically destroy but we also
mean critical argumentation like he
attacked that that point that I just
made and we don't feel they're not I'd
logically identical but we don't feel
them as you know radically disjunctive
from each other
notice we do it with this we sort
yes I want to do it that way there's
something here and we'll use the word
see and we can use that to mean either
right visual experience or kaput we can
use C to mean to understand and then
that converges back we can use but we
can use understand or originally
understand but we changed it to
understand and that can mean to stand
under but it can also mean conceptual
understanding and so there's a weird
synonymy between understand and see I'm
trying to point out to you how complex
this is now what's interesting about
Lake often Johnson is they don't claim
this as an evolutionary thing pointing
to instant ways of being conscious this
is something pervasive in our cognition
and our culture right now and it doesn't
point to the evolution across
generations it points to psychological
development within individuals
psychological development within
individuals according to Lake often
Johnson we start out in sensory motor
seeing and then that gets taken up into
this conceptual sense of seeing we start
with a sensory motor way of
understanding that gets taken up we
start as a sensory motor way of
attacking and that gets taken up it's a
psychological process of development and
it is ongoing right now and it is
pervasive
there might be something sort of
fundamentally wrong therefore with Barre
fields evolutionary analysis now Verve a
key and Kennedy argued that the
psychological development is deeper and
then as being represented by Lake often
Johnson we argue that the model is too
simplistic
as I mentioned we argued that there
should be a top-down aspect to this
psychological development not just
brought them up so there's a sense in
which we agree with Lake often Johnson
that there's stuff coming up from the
century but we think and here's the
influence of Corbin right especially on
me I don't know if there's an influence
on John Kennedy but definitely on me
here's the abstract intellectual and
here's the concrete sensory and then
they meet together in the imaginal that
when I say I see what you're saying
this is an imaginable way that's that's
getting a top a bottom up from seeing as
a sensory motor thing and then bringing
into imaginal expression this abstract
not yet speakable sense of understanding
that helps to explain why these two very
different sensory motor things verbal
experience standing other or another
totally different one grasping or yet
another one getting why do all of these
converge because there is something like
an intellectual form that they converge
upon but it is also expressed developed
through these different imaginal
renderings that connect back to concrete
instances of the sensory motor
so
I argued that we can link that to
Michael Anderson's notion of the massive
redeployment hypothesis the circuitry
use cognitive excitation I went through
this idea of how the same symbolic now
you can understand it as the imaginal is
this process of re excitation how I can
invoke balance I can invoke balance to
talk about justice and then I have the
image not an imaginary the imaginal
statue of Lady Justice as a way of using
reacting the physical balance machinery
and using that machinery to give a
structural functional organization to
this hard to articulate ineffable sense
of justice recycling that whole process
in deducing new functions
it's an enacted metaphor it's an enacted
symbol this is paresis I think in its
deeper sense this helps to explain the
translucency of the symbol why we can
see through it see it and see through it
I can look at it as physical balance but
I can see through it into justice and
justice and balance are not logically
identical but they're not they're not
separate from each other it also
explains our temptation to literalism
and idolatry we can forget we can forget
justice and focus just on having balance
we can lose the iconic seeing through
and only look at the concrete now back
to bar fields evolutionary schema he
talks about that we had original
participation and then there's the
division which is the meaning crisis and
he's really explicit about the meeting
crisis read to read the opening essay in
the rediscover
meaning he's really clear about that and
then we have the two worlds mythology
and we have that everything is being
broken up the inner and the outer being
separated the subject of the objective
blah blah blah you know all of this but
the idea is what we need to do is to
move to what he calls final
participation as a response to the
meeting crysis final participation is a
recovery of participation integrated
within the gains of the rational
sciences now he says that and that's
explicitly and importantly what he means
and I take him at his word part of what
that means and this is what he
emphasizes is the recovery of the
perspectival and the participatory and I
think that is deeply right and deeply
consonant but here's where I'm critical
of Barfield but I think it also means
and this is where Barfield does not do I
think good work it also means a science
of meaning cultivation how does that
participatory and perspectival
participation right fit into our
scientific processes are scientifically
I'd be if you're going to integrate in
final participation participation with
the scientific rational mind both sides
have to be involved in this marriage or
it will fail that of course is what I've
tried to do with relevance realization
theory and then put it into discourse
with spirituality symbolism sacredness
and these these great prophets of the
meaning crisis
now here's more of a criticism of VAR
Fields followers I think there needs to
be more understanding of how much
Barfield is indebted to Coleridge and
Schlegel and understanding sacredness as
a paresis participation of the
inexhaustible within transformative
creativity you can't simply import
Barfield into classical theism and say
oh he's just he's just talking about the
things we've always been talking about
how is that going to bring about final
participation that is not fair
to bar fields argument or his ideas this
is and this leads to me at the point
that the fuschia argues that this is
what makes Barfield different to
Heidegger Heidegger as we saw took from
Eckhart this right this notion of
relating to this letting the rose be and
he takes up to this notion from at court
delays in height John Caputo talks a lot
about this the leading beam and he tends
to emphasize a deep so you can see what
I did is doing he's trying to respond
but like Nietzsche he's overcompensating
des cartes notion of the complete
activity of mine so Heidegger responds
by a complete passivity glaze and height
letting be letting be it's a deep
passivity it's so bloody Lutheran know
it and and there's something deeply you
know right about that aspect of Eckhart
but but Heidegger forgets the other
important term in Eckart dirt Brook dirt
Brook breakthrough breakthrough
you know what breakthrough it's all
about it's about attentional scaling
breaking the inappropriate frame moving
through and making the new frame dirt
Brooke is just as important as glaze in
height and this is something Barfield
picks up on that right the his notion of
creativity as participatory
is not to be just passively receptive oh
of course it's not what Heidegger
criticizes either the Cartesian
technological imposition of our will on
the world that's not what's meant by
poesis are either poesis is synergistic
God because I think Barfield is
ultimately non-theistic and in some very
important ways God plays the leading
role but we contribute and this was the
original Hebrew insight of the off we're
not just passive recipients of history
nor are we it's complete authors we
participate history we participate in
history and we are synergistically
working with God in its making is
Barfield a non-theist I don't know I
can't make that argument as clearly as I
can make it for Heidegger for Jung for
Corbin for Tillich I suspect though if
Barfield were to talk to these other
prophets of the meaning crisis he would
also be led into a kind of non theism
that is clearly the case for people like
Slagel who so deeply influenced him what
have I tried to show you I've tried to
show you that the language the right the
not the language that the greater the
the vocabulary the grammar of the
framework of relevance realization and
how it can be developed to talk about
spirituality and sacredness can be put
into deep dialogue with Heidegger deep
dialogue with Corbin deep dialogue with
Jung deep dialogue with Atilla deep
dialogue with Barfield and also afford
deep dialogue critical but creative
dialogue between them and afford a
potential synoptic integration all of
this
is what I've meant by and what I mean by
awakening from the meaning crisis thank
you so very much for this long journey
we have traveled together
I've often taxed your attention your
patience your understanding your good
spirits I thank you for the ongoing
support and appreciation and
encouragement many of you have given me
and I look forward to an ongoing
dialogue in the next series that I will
create thank you very much and I want to
thank deeply the crew constant here my
brothers in this project who continually
afforded it and made it possible to be
presented to you at this exemplary level
of excellent quality thank you very much
one and all
[Music]
you
you