welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
[Music]
boom alright welcome to the stoah I'm
Peter Lindbergh the steward of the stoah
stoah place where Rico hear and dialogue
about what matters most at the nice edge
of this moment and this is a one of our
sense making series and it's called the
dark stoah starring Pat Ryan and rumor
has it he's one of the one of the most
if not the most dangerous man on the
internet and if you were following the
dark stole a series season one wrapped
up last week and it was a wild ride we
had we heard talks on Chris Perez art
belief as technology robotic nationalism
Auto calls and Gnostic warfare and for
season two it's on devouring humanism
and then Pat sent this message on
Facebook to me where I teach you how to
analyze everything blue church does for
the sole purpose of destroying every
single foothold it has Oh sounds pretty
juicy so that being said same drill as
last time past me share his thoughts and
then we're gonna have a Q&A at the end
this will be recorded and put on YouTube
so if you don't be on YouTube just
indicate for me to read your question
your behalf that being said I'll hand it
over to Pat excellent thank you again
for the introduction and thank you all
for returning for season two of whatever
my mind has come up with I appreciate
the audience and and the willingness to
keep sticking this out it's partial
therapy and it's also confirmation that
I think I'm not the only one who sees
some of the things I'm talking about so
usually I give you a primer about what
the episode is gonna be about but I
decided to bacon in the episode so let's
just get started
ooh I need you to enable screen sharing
sir
my sticky can you do it out let me find
it yes I can thank you much already
welcome to Gaussian identity I've been
accused of using big words to make
myself sound intelligent which I always
respond that's preposterous so let's
explain what this means last season we
were exploring this meme without even
knowing it which is rather interesting
we broke down the whole season in
various episodes covering various
collections of these ideas so all season
one was here basically everything that
was being covered there which was
Gnostic warfare we didn't get too much
into this side however so this season is
going to be examining why this site even
exists if you detect these things
happening and what you can do about it
which I'll be calling it devouring
humanism that's a play on words it's
whether humanism is devouring us or
perhaps we should devour it depending
upon how you interpret it and as we go
over this will explain why it's not a
bad idea to do so so for season 4
episode 1 we'll be focusing on gauzy and
identity which covers these points in
the pink box thusly ok so what is
identity isn't that the great question
everyone has a billion opinions on it
and for every person they have 10
definitions of identity and as always I
challenge your definitions and hopefully
guide it in a more lucrative fashion so
let's start with how philosophy and math
reviews identity it states very simply
that if anything that's indiscernible
that's basically what the identity is so
if x equals 6 and y equals 7 then x
equals y and thus that's the identity x
equals y it's worth noting that perhaps
these two statements are what's making
them different despite the value that
they are but that again leads into the
realm of philosophy so what does
psychology and neurology have to say
they say that the brain is a meat-based
Otto correlator of temporal events
meaning if this is your timeline this is
your time or X is your time and this is
I forget what S stands for but the point
is like Pat you have events that are
going to happen they funnel into your
brain and then they become past events
so the ability to correlate these events
is how you stitch your identity and in
psychology and neurology now whether
that's completely true or not again
what is the relationship between
philosophy and math and psychology and
neurology well it's not readily obvious
how do I get x equals 6 and then some
little dot being correlated to some
other dot that might happen it's it's
not an easy transfer it's not an easy
way to comport the two domains so we
automatically see right up front that
identity is really domain-specific and
then we get the sociology where it says
you don't even exist
you're just an intersection of groups
group dynamics so now I'm here if this
is Group A of circus clowns and giraffe
hunters and I don't know people I don't
like on the internet that I'm here right
so I don't even exist
I'm just an intersection that's a court
in sociology finance sees you as a
vehicle for future activity and also a
modifiable vehicle for future activity
you volunteer to promise future activity
and if you don't deliver it they have
ways to make you involuntarily deliver
it so that's how Finance fuse identity
you're you're just a you're an occupant
on a future bond basically on a future
promise to deliver productivity is you
may have heard the phrase let's pivot
and go in a different direction in this
case you're a distribution of adjustable
priority focuses maybe I'm focused on
checking my emails maybe I'm focused on
writing code maybe I'm focused on
walking my dog and I shift between these
distributions as time allows it so as
myself as project manager I have maximum
flexibility with these individual
identities so I can actually shift your
focus and by doing so I change your
identity then there's alchemy alchemy is
a little-known thing there's a billion
opinions on it but long story short the
idea is that identity is never known it
is a black box it is a permanent black
box you feed it context and you get
action this is an old way of
interpreting identity which is no longer
considered anymore but we're gonna find
a way to bring this guy right on back
and let's see to keep going what does
physics say physics just threw up his
hands around 1930 with the Pauli
exclusion principle where it couldn't
figure out anything really I couldn't
tell you one photon from another it
couldn't figure out fermions from
anything it's all meso you couldn't even
rely on physics to figure out well this
atom is occupying this unique spot in
time and then this atoms occupy well it
turns out they they sometimes overlap
and occupy the same space because their
distribution of probability of existence
so it gets real messy can't even rely on
physics for identity then you get to
biology where every time your cells go
through mitosis they keep asserting the
same DNA over every generation over and
over and over again perhaps that's an
identity and then there's error
correcting in the DNA duplication
process to keep that continuity going so
there's a strong biological definition
of identity right there and then there's
geopolitics where where you are born you
are bound to the rival as power dynamics
of whatever group you're born into
because on this spheroid we call Earth
not all topologies are equal they're not
all equally valuable they don't have
equal resources on them and no matter
how we configure ourselves according to
all the previous mentioned domains we
might not get equality of outcome either
so all of these things are heuristics of
identity so the idea of saying that this
is identity and and it's it's it's a
race thing or it's a gender thing or
it's it man it's all over the place it's
it's a there was a whole grab bag of of
concepts you can use to define identity
and as we assemble those heuristics
together that's what politics is let me
walk you through that firecracker of a
statement right so let's look at
race-based scientific nationalism which
we all know is a certain continental
country in 1940 tried this out where
they decided to put the heuristic of
genetics and geo d'Estaing geopolitics
at the first priority of their political
system meaning when it came to the
resources that a political system could
channel or control or modify when it
came to flowing it through its political
web the
two points got first dibs so these guys
got first access to it and as you get
further down the chain you get least and
least access so all these guys get all
the nice stuff and then you know crumbs
everyone else and that's that's
prioritization of identity heuristics in
politics and as you change these around
you get totally different political
systems so in the case of race-based
scientific nationalism I'm putting
genetics and Geo destiny at the front
psychology comes next I'm gonna look at
physics as something to invest in
regarding identity then math and
eventually Finance and Finance usually
finances like this fulcrum this bowtie
where everything on this side is the
driver and everything on this side is
management then you get groups and you
individual is just like way to hell down
Honda you don't get any resources buddy
sorry science is way more important than
you are that's just life and then you
turn around psychometric liberal
capitalism where we put psychology at
the top the research of psychology and
the analyst and the analysis of human
behavior
mathematics is gonna try best at these
two factors alone you get psychometric
economics which then you bind to the
horse of financial management and then
you get everything else and and in this
case you know physics is just not even
remotely important in any type of
liberal capitalism and then you get to
erasing geopolitics of course those are
going to be at the end the idea of
liberal capitalism is to maximize the
psychology of each individual's so these
things should be smooth out and don't
matter because we can always modify the
brain and then you have communal blank
slate capitalism which people tend to
call communism which is adorable but a
state you know it's state capitalism
with the assumptions of communal blank
slates so the idea of sociology being
the core driver of financial management
meaning how do i configure these
intersections of groups to then bind
their productivity to what I need or I
bind their promises of the future to my
ability to manage everyone else
psychology comes downstream of this
which is an odd priority individuals
come a little bit higher than most other
systems
it's actually interesting pen that
alchemy tends to over weigh geopolitics
after all these guys want to you know
dissolve borders in that type of
business
but these are just examples I might be
giving them the wrong names and you're
free to go full autism and stickler on
that but I'm just demonstrating a
politics do priorities on identity
heuristics not individual identities
that's that's what we and democracy in
America tend to get confused about we
tend to think that certain identities
get priority but in reality it's the
heuristic of identities that gets
priority how do we determine what
identities exist that's what's given
primacy and by the way all of these
permutations well look at that they just
happen to be the blue church political
distribution trend so when we say blue
church we're talking about these
configurations of priority and how
they're all related they're not
radically different from one another
they're not once a can of soup and once
a fish they're all cousins of one
another
driven by the same pressures driven by
the same conclusions and that's what
makes it a distribution trend and that
is what a blue church is is a
distribution of what identity heuristics
take priority so let's look at the
mutation because I brought it up so what
does the mutation of a political system
look like well it goes something like
this you turn around to the two
priorities and you say they made us feel
sad maybe it didn't like gene-based
primacy of your population mechanics and
maybe you thought geopolitics was a
pretty stupid idea to to peg all your
finance on and you turned around and you
picked two other candidates you said you
know if we merge psychology with this
financial management business maybe that
will help us solve the problems that
we're facing here so you're shuffling
your heuristics around you're trying to
figure out which one you really care
about
of course there's superstitious crap
over here that always you know you just
push that down because that doesn't
matter that's all just like weirdos and
voodoo things we know whatever not even
caret we're not interested that we're
trying to solve our problem here right
so what do we do well we just found a
way to create psychometric liberal
capitalism from race-based scientific
nationalism and all we had to do was
change our identity heuristics we need
to put psychology and Finance at the top
with math ISM Arbour
traitor and then we put these two
concepts way the hell down we got rid of
them we didn't like the idea of genetic
destiny we didn't like the idea of geo
destiny we wanted the ability to say
everyone has a brain and no matter what
these other properties are we can just
tinker the brain endlessly and
infinitely - to get what we want and and
get this maximum of efficacy of the
human condition and every every person
in our population so we can maximize all
the humans in our system so okay we won
woohoo we got our science in the science
that gets us all the goodies we did it
the great struggles over look at us and
these you know these Sciences are evil
forever we'll never touch them again
we'll banned them and anybody who
touches them will just drive down to
Alex Jones level and away you go do we
have a revolution or did we just have a
mutation everybody wants a revolution
that's the sexy thing right especially
nowadays everybody wants to be the the
rebel on the Internet rah rah but it's
just it's no different than DNA mutation
it's just adjusting your base pairs in
this case your base pair is gonna be
your your identity heuristic oh and by
the way here's a visualization showing
that resource distribution in terms of
priority as you can see get here and
nobody gets any crumbs now why is it a
blue church is it a blue church because
of the individual configurations
no that's not it is it a blue church
because the priorities that are at the
top that's not it either the reason why
those things in the previous slide or
the blue church is because of what they
put last
these guys hate absolutely loathe
anything that is theocracy that is
religious that is alchemical that is
mystical these concepts of human
psychology are not allowed to exist
unchecked in a blue church scenario
because they're dangerous
especially when you're coming up with
these meticulous systems of
psychological finance with these
meticulous systems of race driven
nationalism if you if you screw with the
configuration of any one of those tiny
axioms that power these systems and this
can do that well now you have a problem
so these guys are the biggest threat
because they can actually screw up your
entire distribution flow in your
political system so that's why they're
driven to the redheaded stepchild okay
so how do you do this we're looking at
now we're looking at the gradient we're
not actually interested in the we're not
looking at the permutation of identity
heuristics now we're just looking at the
overall gradient so let's just step back
and look at the gradient of resource
distribution independent of whatever
political system may exist it goes from
left to right all the crumbs go here is
your military industrial complex and
here's funding your school right so keep
that in mind so now let's look at why
the blue church political gradient
persists with the reinforcement factors
it has from that that funny little meme
that was at the beginning of the
presentation we have runaway self
domestication as the top the idea that a
human revert from the Chad to the Burge
and meme which is always wanting in this
case once a person becomes caught in the
runaway self domestication phase they
have a high chance of staying here on
their own they don't wander off and try
to experiment with other type of
identity heuristics once they're here
they're here it's pretty hard to break
it you actually have to do systemic
level attacks to break this it's not
easy
we have exhibitionist Stockholm Syndrome
oh look a person with a tattoo of some I
have Providence on themselves they're
not only cattle but they're self
branding cattle too right so there's
Stockholm there they're under the
control of whatever master that they may
or may not even recognize and you know
they take pride in the fact that they're
under that control
and these little green arrows what
they're doing is they're decided if you
think of the population that's scattered
between this gradient these hours are
made to drive direction so if you're
caught if you're in a population here
it's gonna drive you this way if you're
in an exhibition of Stockholm Syndrome
it's gonna drive you more towards green
if you're part of homogeneous Asians
gonna drive you this way all right so
homogeneous ations an easy one that's
where everybody looks the same and if
you've ever been in any corporation that
makes over five billion dollars a year
you will see exactly what I'm talking
about self victimization we all know and
love this one the idea that I'm the
martyr now I'm at different stages of my
martyrdom I'm not out there running
around you know blowing myself up but
I'm I'm on the track I just need to be
activated
that's what self victimization that's
the purpose of it when you when you look
at it from a control scheme it's to get
that person primed and ready for
martyrdom on demand and you built an
entire culture that and all this is
designed to keep blue church people or
designed to keep the population in the
blue church funneled driving this way
towards the high resource distribution
that they're able to provide because
that's the way they set up their system
I'm not necessarily evil per se or
they're doing this on purpose
it's just a byproduct of how they
configure their identity heuristics
really universalism is the idea that
every single human being there is no
borders between our personal beings
we're all the same and this kind of
stuff and it's it's just designed to try
people more towards this and as we get
closer to the red space we're finding
people that are more expensive for the
blue church to convert so here's
low-hanging fruit fishing with dynamite
blue church can convert these people all
day every day no problem you get here
and it gets more expensive for blue
church to start tinkering with the
identity heuristics because they're not
throwing resources at it so they don't
have the means to command it or control
it get the antinatalism I can go on and
on about the endless abortion debates
that exist but you get the point this in
psychologically this is designed to
create a kind of zero day mentality
where there is no future and there is no
past there's only a bunch of 20
year-olds running around it's it's a
it's a ridiculous psychological hack
that's
designed to create this this this
beautiful looking moderate heaven that
everybody swears exists it said there's
there's a lot of psychological onion
peeling that happens here when you look
at population distribution
conscientiousness you get the here
already here so now we're at the people
who are too expensive to convert and
we're at the people who are getting more
who are or cheaper to convert
consciousness is this kind of like
conflict resolution between the two
where if a population is here I'm gonna
put out messages of like you know
between your heart and your brain you
have to you have to be rational and you
have to kind of understand the scenario
and hear each other out and that's
entirely a cost strategy that's not for
the good of mankind that's a it's a cost
purist that's a that's a cost assessment
of the identity heuristic then you have
the fighter class and the NPC's these
are the people who basically like the
guard labor of the of the official order
of the regime these guys basically
protect everyone from here from doing
anything to these people it's it's funny
to think of these guys as a fighter
class but we do call them social justice
warriors right so they're technically a
fighter class and they're ready to rage
out at a moment's notice they want a
guard the order that they love this is
the this is the order that has given
them universalism and conscientiousness
and exhibitionism and all the things
that they love and have made their
entire identities about because of the
arrangement of the heuristics it's not
actually something wrong with them has
nothing to do with them or their
psychology it's just the order of the
identity heuristics that has caused this
outcome and Pete cocktails the idea of
like strutting around and look how look
at my identity and my my individualism
my hyper individualism these people are
too expensive to reach because they get
more and more what is considered
unstable and they're thinking as opposed
to people here so you try to appeal to
their individualism you try to rope
these try to tug them out of this part
by saying oh you're a cool individual
person let's let's get you on the train
and see if we can push you this way it's
a you know it's a hack it's a it's a
trick for the it's a cost
strategy for this area contributing
through defeat sour grapes the idea that
you tried to reach for the grapes but
you didn't get them and you say well I
didn't want them anyway that's another
concept of well you're gonna fail here
because we structured the entire
organization for you to fail but as you
fail here's a nice little thing you can
tell yourself so it doesn't feel like
failure so we can push you along the
chain put from here on pushing everyone
up that's the goal but when it gets too
expensive we have to push people down
there's no way to push them through and
make them this productive citizen within
our regime within our identity heuristic
collection at some point there is a line
is gonna change per system there is a
line in which you are now it's too
expensive to deal with these people and
so you need to trap them in a
self-defeating mechanism because you
just don't have the resources remember
the further down we go the less
resources you have so you just don't
have the resources to micromanage every
single person so you gotta trap them in
this kind of endless chaos of existence
so I don't know if anybody recalls this
but last man is from Nietzsche it's
considered the last human on earth or at
least not less when are the last sort of
self-aware / or no I'm sorry it's the
last
it's the last human who
[Music]
my memories fading me though certain
this reason I picked this meme I'm
pretty sure someone in chat knows this
I'm just slipping right now this is the
guy from from idiocracy who's sitting in
his chair when he walks up he's the guy
who's just baiting at the beginning it's
that guy right that's that's Nietzsche's
last man in American parlance it's just
person who's just completely plugged
into every possible bit of of leisure
and every possible concept of of just
decadence and simply exists to consume
that's it that's that person then you
have VOC of course a dolphin portly is
the great evil
that's probably self-explanatory you
don't want to you don't want people
organizing here especially at this level
one's too expensive and you don't have
the means to break them apart so you
just demonize any action that might
result in a self organization especially
automatic self-organization then there's
of course every redditor on earth
obsessed with contradiction you make
this a grand taboo you know oh you're
not logical so therefore here's how I'm
going to destroy you this is almost
every single internet debate ever in the
history of the internet you're doing is
you're driving contradiction at this
level so people again don't self
organize they don't feel like they
understand anything beyond this point so
they have no interest in engaging in
anything beyond this point so you're
snuffing their ability to engage in
ambition at all or even wiping out the
desire to even look at this part of the
equation so it drives them further down
into the more expensive bucket to boxing
reprobates to the people who are who are
kind of defying this identity regime
because what they're doing is they're
being multiple people at the same time
whether it's identity fraud whether
they're being different people online
doesn't necessarily matter it's the idea
that I'm one person but I have multiple
personas and that becomes really
expensive to fix and it becomes really
expensive to track so this is like
usually deemed evil and I'll give you an
example of a word that all of you know
and have used before to describe this
behavior and then you get to the very
end where you have the inability to
deploy a Turing test
because now we have people doing their
identity hacking they're making multiple
identities of a making clouded
identities and then we're trying to
automatically detect them because we
don't have the resources to actually
enforce you know a universal bonding or
homogenize ation we only have like I
don't know 700 bucks down here so what
you're doing is you're leaving something
wide open for a turret before you don't
have the resources to deploy Turing
tests to then separate which box is the
real box and then drive home the point
this is a this is this CAPTCHA check
saying I am NOT a robot being tapped by
our robot with googly eyes so that's
kind of what happens so this is what
I've described to you is how the blue
church maintains its we use the word
control but I think that's too broad and
I think it misses so much this is how
this is the system of incentives the
blue church uses to reach the maximum
amount of identities required to keep
its system going and then there's a
threshold in which these people are just
written off you don't need them anymore
they're too expensive you don't have the
resources anyway just demonize them call
it a day so that's that's blue church
right then the internet happened that
changed things because now you could
play the game of masks so here's a
slepen deli owner but online that's a
super model and that's Frank it doesn't
matter I'm online I could be a dog gonna
be a chipmunk who cares
doesn't matter I'm online you can't
prove that I'm not that person that I'm
presenting is you have no way of doing
it it's like oh my god palindrome
friends right and then they're chatting
let me step back here so the chatting
you go to a chat like the reason why
this is the reason why it's this way to
begin with is because it was too
expensive to send any type of proof of
identity in the early internet wasn't
possible
you had like 2400 baud rate and you were
sending text at best you couldn't send
pictures or video or audio or GPS stuff
or all the metadata crap that's going on
now you just had text period and if all
you had all you have with each other is
text man you could lie all day long
there is no proof of identity you can
even a force here and it's way too
expensive so that's how this
game started and when you deal with like
some of the really old people on 4chan
they remember these days these are the
glory days this is a golden age of the
internet man you could be anything and
anyone and it was good because the rest
of the world was obsessed with identity
at this time they couldn't get enough of
it I'm a FARC guerrilla I'm a I'm a
European Pan nationalist theist blah
blah blah I'm a I'm a liberal
conservative social democrat look at me
dance right after the whole world was
obsessed with identity because it was so
deeply tied to Cold War dynamics the
internet was a way to say that I
don't care about that anymore
that's stupid I exist independent of
these paradigms so yeah I am a two-box
supermodel because it and that was
the early internet and the way then the
primary means of communication made that
so so now we got Evans we have to
incentivize honest identities here and
we don't have to this this posting
everyone's lying game could have gone on
forever and maybe it would have been
better if it didn't at least it would
have been a nice pressure pal for all
the social stuff we're seeing now but
unfortunately advertisers had to get
involved and they saw a bunch of people
in chat rooms and mailing lists and
everything else and they said I want to
make money I want to own a set of these
people course on Google and Facebook
coming instead of hot I know what to do
I will connect people to who they want
to be connected to and what it is they
want to be connected to so whatever
these people will now be empowered to
fulfill their preference selection we're
gonna bind that with advertising so
we're going to incentivize people to
stop doing this and that resulted in the
collection of face data and GPS data and
voice prints and gate data and social
network data and before you know it you
didn't necessarily destroy these
personas people can still do them but
for the people who care they could
figure out who's who
so now what we've done with this system
is we've taken all of the crazy identity
mess that these people initially escaped
when they went to the internet and we
have forced it back on the internet so
we've tried to synchronize our identity
control regime's our identity heuristics
upon this space where there wasn't any
and oh by the way this space is not
organic this space is a digital
representation of all of these things so
there's automatically a mistranslation
and let's look what that mistranslation
looks like so when you get started way
back and I don't know 1980 imagine that
each pixel is like I mean obviously it's
pixelated image but try and pretend that
as you're collecting gee as your GPS
technology is growing as your sound
print technologies growing as your image
technology is growing it starts out
really weak it doesn't have high
resolution
maybe the GPS is only sending one paying
a minute maybe the maybe the voice
prints only capturing one every second
so it's a really low resolution and
you're trying to make sense between them
all but as Moore's Law goes on your
Gaussian identity which is the
collection of all of these things that
make you up in the digital space the
distribution of these data points it
increases in resolution over time so now
we can understand better how to market
to you and better to understand your
psychological dispositions and what
social network you're gonna go to next
and it gets even better over time and it
gets really good over time so now we're
increasing the fidelity of our identity
selection mechanisms as as Moore's law
goes up it's pretty obvious at least so
what happens when we get good enough
what happens when we get to the spot
where it yeah maybe doesn't you know we
don't have all the data on this person
we have enough to get what he's going
well that's where we get our Gaussian
distribution not all data is infinitely
valuable and I feel real bad for
investors come 2025 where they say data
is the new oil that's not true there's a
Gaussian distribution meaning the
resolution of digital identity versus
the profit
extracted from successfully identity
from successful identity targeting
there's a relationship here so if you
follow this you'll see that craft
resolution and an extremely good
resolution but that's not what's it
getting more resolution does not drive
more profit there is a normal
distribution in which you have good
enough and adding more resolution to the
data won't do a goddamn thing so we have
these two spaces no is is the data I
have on this person it's not a blob or
is that a person I don't know what that
is I don't have enough resolution to
answer that question that's gonna drive
me to answer that question and then I'm
gonna start collecting more data like oh
how how long is my fingernail on a
Tuesday you gonna turn that into
marketing data right well so you don't
need to increase more information you
don't need to gather more stuff there's
a sweet spot right here
and once you identify that sweet spot
tinkering with these pressures will
allow you to disassemble the entire blue
church it will crush them and I'll show
you why so here's our political I'm
sorry this thing's annoying here's our
political priority gradient where we've
already walked through all of the
pressures that are designed to drive
populations in one direction or another
based on cost distribution of the
identity heuristics so we're gonna draw
your focus over here and I don't even
have my laser on oh man I am trademark
laser sorry guys I'm just losing it
today how do we beat how do we work with
the inability to deploy Turing test so
instead of driving people back they
drive him forward
well we mimic the blue church with bots
and we use natural language processing
content generators
because they can't deploy Turing test to
stop them so now the people who are here
I can push him up a line I can get them
to care about what's going on
ah how interesting how do I beat these
two box reprobates how do you say that
when if you get an online argument
you'll say wait that I'm in arguing with
this person but then this person comes
in and wait they're always in agreeing
what if you found out it was the same
person from two accounts that would feel
like someone's cheated the game right
and you're like ah you cheated with your
identity I'm arguing it's the same
person you leave the you know you leave
the argument upset and you know you know
pissed and whatever but the other way to
do that just call them trolls patrolling
you so now instead of you know saying
that identity multiplication is a sin
we've made it a fun thing to do it's a
fad it's cool to do was hilarious so now
we push people instead of people being
pushed down by being to boxing
reprobates we incentivize being to
boxing reprobates and we push them up
contradiction you say oh well you didn't
logically a - sure you didn't - you're T
and dot your eye here so that's a
contradiction I got you and you do the
autism hair-splitting all day that read
it's known for well in this case I don't
need to do contradiction contradiction
drives people that way trés people this
way I want to drive people this way so
instead of saying contradiction we have
to sit there and redo your white paper
which is really just like a 20-word
comment this is an engaging conspiracy
instead so instead of trying to do that
- Ella t logical discussion that you're
being forced to do under a contradiction
paradigm you say well I'm just gonna
speak in a very fuzzy manner and say
yeah well the Apple was here or it
wasn't but you get my drift
you say stuff like that you speak in
much relaxed tones and so what you're
doing is you're bypassing the
contradiction so anything any guard
keeping that's done here instead of
driving you backwards again it's driving
you forwards when it comes to bulk
focused grand taboo no one's ever
allowed to assemble unless it's pre
authorized by academia or financial
banking until you get the gamers oh boy
gamers are whoo those people they
organized for fun
they don't do it for politics or for no
identity reasons they just get together
and shoot each other for fun they get
drunk
smoke weed call each other the n-word
all day yeah it's just bunch of dudes
whatever having fun and what you're
doing is you're making folk the grand
taboo which would drive people this way
and now we're saying gaming we're gonna
drive them that way taking the last man
last man is a tough one to beat because
it's so psycho it's so philosophically
well understood it's a real tough one to
beat so the way he beat it is actually
with nostalgia so if you see that if you
ever see a last man one of those dudes
from idiocracy who's just baiting on his
couch all day what you do is you you
kind of either remind him of the fact
that he came from a line of people or
you look at yourself and realize you
came from a line of people who made this
possible nostalgia is a tough one it
goes both ways and it could be it could
be Wow our ancestors are so great and
you're like we can be great and the
implication is we could be great too and
then it can go the other way and say oh
wow our ancestors are so great which
you're like oh man we've fallen so far
so you gotta be real careful in this
tell Joe this is this is a hit or miss
but again last man is a real tough one
to beat the amount of drugs that exists
in the system to keep people in this
state is pretty immense so this this is
a tough one to overcome but there are
ways to there are ways to push it up
contributing through defeat which is the
sour grapes Nereo where you where you
tried to start a business and it fails
and you just throw it up and say oh I
don't want to start that business anyway
you rationalize your own loss we just
shame those people become cooks screw em
because you lost and you're
rationalizing that loss and you're
living with that rationalization you're
a cook so instead of people losing and
feeling okay about that loss and being
driven this way no no we're driving you
that way and the reason we want to drive
them that way so they can run through
this funnel we've already built they're
gonna be driven in this way and they're
gonna run through this funnel and then
when they come back they will not be
under the influence of the blue church
at all because this is the this is the
uncovering space this is where they
cannot deploy resources
the peacock tails where I'm the I'm the
celebrity I'm the big sexy thing look at
my you know look at my natural
disposition and and look how charming
and charismatic I am a Hollywood thing
that's the peacocking tails appealing to
all that individualist
drivin compulsion well what if you found
a way to create communities where the
content is more important than the
person sharing the content or the
content is more important than a person
who made the content that's what
anonymous image boards do the content is
superior to the person who posts so we
take these these hyper individual poor
souls and we say you literally don't
matter because you're no different than
a bot on an image board
it's your content it's your contribution
that matters it's not what you look like
that matters so we take those people and
we say to the back you go you're getting
pushed right buddy fighters and NPCs
these these hair trigger guard labor of
the regime
you just predetonate them how do you do
that with taboo mulattos Miletus you
know a militia is is that red cape that
the bullfighter has so what you do is
you you find a you find a taboo that
that person is predisposition to hate
and you just dump it on them non-stop
every day till they detonate over and
over and over again till they isolate
themselves - they remove themselves from
their support network to the point they
become a burden to the point that
they're too expensive imagine if a
bodyguard was running around punching
every single person in the bar because
someone just triggered him right that
bouncer would get fired and now that
guard labor has been removed so instead
of that guard labor going to the left
now we're pushing it to the right so
we're gonna detonate you into until
you're gone because you're so far gone
there's no wave you're reaching you a
logic it's just we don't have we don't
have the cost even support that that
that reformation of your character sorry
all we can do is push you to the right
and hope that you go through this
pipeline that we've set up on the way
here conscientiousness the idea that I
have to you know I have to be reasonable
and I have to be rational that's good
and you actually want to keep that you
don't necessarily want to destroy that
as is instead what you want to do is you
want to use memes to atomize morality
meaning instead of moral systems being
this fuzzy thing
where are you saying oh well you know
it's one half or the other if you know
everything there's a gray area this type
of conscientiousness that these tactics
you use to to try and bring parties
together what you do instead is you use
memes to atomize every part of that blob
every part of that gray area you put a
wedge with a meme so now instead of the
person trying to ration we're not
rationalize but instead of that person
leaving open of wide space in which
people can then kind of come together
now they have to negotiate all of those
little axioms all of those little points
that those means we're leaving to and
they have to they have to make sense of
that sort of conscientiousness gets
atomized they have they become they
start being very specific about what it
is excuse me they start they start
becoming very specific about who they
let into their systems instead of having
this wide tent so you still keep
conscientiousness but instead of having
it at a universal scale were you
maximizing the number of people who are
going through your conscientious process
instead what you're doing is you're
saying okay here's the local area that
this person's probably gonna gravitate
towards anyway and that's what they're
actually defending this whole time
they're not out there trying to maximize
for maximum amount of people and kumbaya
 they're saying okay here's what
they actually care about and they'll
have a small group of people where they
can be conscientious and that's good you
want that we're not trying to wipe that
off the earth but in this case there'll
be so because they're precise about
their conscientiousness the system will
attack them the regime will attack them
and that's gonna drive them right so in
this case we're activating is here where
we get to a conscientious part where we
activate the immune system of the regime
and we drive them to the right because
we actually want to preserve
conscientiousness we just want to
redefine it to something that's actually
reasonable you could say that I'm
conscientious about you know starving
kids in Africa that is sad that is
objectively sad of course but your
neighbors are starving too what's
relevant what's actually meaningful make
the meme atomized and you force them to
make that localization antinatalism is a
tough one the reason you fight it is
because it's a pre-programmed trigger
not because you actually support stuff
that's not the point
the point is
this is such a heavily implanted meme
and so many people that if you do not
take advantage of this you are not
playing the win so what you do is the
typical statement is that you know
they're not alive or they're not human
or all these things that doesn't matter
the point is I can make you see them
human by pointing out their identity
asymmetries y'all ever heard of
gendercide
mmm if they're not alive does that mean
I'm not disproportionately killing women
when I abort them uh-oh now we have a
problem
if I decide to disproportionately apply
abortion on to a black community is that
racist or what is it so what I'm doing
now is I'm using the woman the morality
of the regime to cause fraction points
in this for whatever reason this mean
that they have swore this hill they
would die on over and over again so this
is kind of a blend of the predetonation
strategy but again you you attack here
not because you have an opinion on the
subject you attack here because it's
they have just sunk so many goddamn
hours and they're making people think
that this is the hill to die on that you
have to activate it and the gold
activated is to drive them to the right
because they either either dig in and
they keep going this way and they get
rewarded for digging and then they will
or they start to see that hey now wait a
second maybe disproportionately aborting
aborting females might be a bad thing
and which this whole system will then
whack them and you know into our tunnel
into our tunnel they go universalism the
beautiful idea that we're all the same
and we should all be treated equally
yeah these are beautiful words most
beautiful words ever written no doubt
but there's a reason tribalism exists in
our in our psychology and as a psycho
armor and the idea that I go to a
identity tribe or an identity tribe but
I go to this tribal state with people
who are similar to myself and that's not
just to reassert confirmation bias
that's a blue church concept we're going
to these tribes so that we can defend
ourselves from the onslaught of
epistemic wildness that's coming our way
we can't make sense of it alone and if
we are alone you're drifting in this
ocean of chaos that's gonna you know
toss because toss back back and forth
between this gradient and nobody wants
that because they know one person can
make sense of any of this stuff it's
just way too much data points so you go
to tribes to to give you a psychological
armor a filter a way of processing all
of this noise that's going on so you can
what you do is you provide tribes that
correspond to
universalism so for example universalism
this wonderful idea that we can all push
each other in one direction or another
we can all we were all the same
I mean tribes a cycle or what if I make
a tribe that whatever make a tribe of
universalism what if I make a tribe of
the people who like universalism what if
I just fragment this down over and over
again and it looks like universalism all
the same but in reality I'm normalizing
their entry in the tribes and I'm
normalizing their ability to go into
these places so now once they do it they
have psycho armor and all of a sudden
the universalism doesn't work anymore
because they're locally bound to the
people in that tribe over time so
instead of leaving the door open for as
many human beings as possible like we
were just some statistical graph they
start making informing actual bonds with
people and upon doing so they will be
seen as enemies of the regime and to the
right they go self victimization again
the the idea that I am a martyr I'm a
martyr with multiple steps between
myself and and glorious sacrifice and
detonation you use anonymization to
diffuse martyrdom martyrdom is deeply
tied to identity it is like one of the
is one of the hallmarks of identity the
idea that a person is willing to die for
the preservation of an identity
heuristic and if you combine that with
mass media then people who died in the
defense of that identity heuristic are
martyrized they're lionize that a great
hero and we have no there's an army of
Heroes every single day right but if
people are anonymous and they don't
exist and they're hidden behind VPN and
tor and you have entire communities
where this is the case where's the
mortars how can you have a martyr if
there's no identity no such thing as a
4chan martyr you might say oh the Christ
the Christ Church guy that he was not
operating on behalf of the anonymous
community he had his own identity
martyrdom complex as well but you know
you don't see 4chan running out there
self-detonating it's way too funny to
make people detonate way too funny so
again instead of self victimization
being a guard labor mechanism what you
do is by being anonymous these people
who are ready to detonate in a moment's
notice when they do it doesn't matter
they detonate in the wrong places
there's no more there's no more
additional martyrs in the pipeline
because they've all gone anonymous so
you're chipping away you when our
getting to the heart of things we're
chipping away at the key distributions
of a political of the political regime
homogeneous Asian is a is the UH it's
where everyone is completely on board
and not just in a static way in a way
that where they say yes I agree with the
regime and everything they do very few
people say that what they do is they
rationalize when the regime makes a wild
swing so like when the regime says we're
gonna save you know cats
everyone's like yes I'm a cat person and
then the regime says cats and
you're like well the cats deserved it
right that's a rationalization that's
also homogenize ation where you're just
you're you're back stopping the regime
and every possible permutation they make
because of course you do look at all the
resources you're getting oh you
back the regime you're not doing it cuz
you're malicious or you're bootlicker
you're on the payroll buddy no kidding
so how do you break a modernization with
meme infections if everyone's thinking
the same anyway drop a good meme in
there in a way it goes you have a
homogenized population of iris oh
that population up see just drop memes
that that are just viral and spread all
over the place as much as you can and
anybody who falls for a meme to the
right you go exhibitionist Stockholm
Syndrome the self branding cattle these
are tough this is the tough one because
these are people who are used to
scarification and people who are used to
having to kick out of them they
like abuse they like the idea of being
controlled it's a sort of state of
masochistic and a sexual term but it's
more more like deferring to the Alpha
deferring to the silverback effectively
you can't kick these people they're like
there's a reason they're the last stop
because the more you abuse them the more
the system is able to use that abuse as
rationalization to restore itself so you
can't deploy levels of violence on them
but we do have the internet we have our
- we have our Turing tests we have our
to boxing whoever trolls we have our
whole pipeline that can support us in
fulfilling their social fantasies
remember the
people are way off the way off the what
do you call it the self-esteem wagon
they let that thing like 20,000 years
ago their way the hell off it so we can
use this pipeline to artificially
fulfill the thing that they've never had
so instead of coming at these guys with
warlike intent you actually come to them
with flowers and roses and you say we're
gonna make you part of this group we're
gonna make you part of this thing we're
gonna treat you like a human being like
legitimately instead of you being
surrounded by your fellow rejects all
the time we're gonna reach out to you
and grab you and say hey man you're
human just like us and that is not what
this system is prepared for they do not
like that because this is the last step
this is the basis of their entire regime
moral structure is the idea that they've
surrounded themselves with these
historically displaced people and they
use them as a human shield the only way
to beat them is to actually display
decent humanism towards them over and
over again even if it costs you your
life even if it costs you everything you
have you have to include them and you
have to take care of them because this
is not what that system is prepared to
handle it's the last thing they'd expect
and then run away domestication you
can't even touch run away domestication
until you've addressed all of these
other points there's no way
so once you've been able to do all this
now you can change how celebrities are
perceived that's one of the major
reinforces of runaway self domestication
well I'm doing this thing I'm self
domesticated myself and I always check
and I see oh there's a popular person oh
okay oh whatever the popular persons
doing okay I'll incorporate it of course
regime controls celebrity but if we can
make everybody a celebrity if instead of
celebrities being this small collection
of pre-sorted individuals if every
single human being was a celebrity
well that changes things that changes
everything now how do you do that well
where are you living through it now the
idea of like twitch people or or people
doing live-streaming or micro
celebrities or stuff like that you use
that technique and you make it
accessible you take this this drive to
be a celebrity and you make it
everywhere you make it as open as you
can for everybody and so these people
who run away self domesticate they'll
still engage in the self domestication
mechanism you're never going to defeat
that it's just core to their being
but they're gonna pick the wrong
celebrity so instead of like a list of
100 now they have like million and which
one do they pick well it doesn't matter
which one they pick
they're picking there's so many options
that they can't pick the same one so
that one celebrity that held all that
power it's gone diffused utterly gone
so
that was intense so let's see where this
may go when we apply this regime hacking
that I'm proposing we're gonna look at
our psychometric liberal capitalism all
the identity heuristics that are
accessible to the resources that are
available in the order of thus and
remember around here the pipeline ships
where are driving people this way is the
goal of the regime and once you get to
this point you drive them this way until
they become full Alex Jones so we just
walk through a system of pushing people
here this way and then pushing people
here this way so that when they get here
they can push back this way
so what does that mean just because you
push the people doesn't mean they're
walking through these identity
heuristics as they get pushed through
the pipeline that's not what happens as
they get pushed through the pipeline
they carry their identity heuristic with
them all the way to the top
so what I showed you as a way to invert
the identity heuristics of a regime
there is a way to turn psychometric
liberal capitalism into automated coal
torque city states using the technique I
just showed you where you put alchemy at
the beginning meaning a black box AI
that you have no idea how it's making
its process and it's using the fuzziness
of quantum mechanics to make its
decisions and these two things get all
the resources and then that plays out on
the city state of geopolitics which is
gonna have a heavy focus on crisper and
quantizing stuff which is going to be
about improving the individual and
groups form wherever they can not
because they have to all of that becomes
a financial driver and the poisons of
math and psychology are kicked to the
dustbin of history for at least a couple
hundred years until people get their
 together so that's it that's how
you defeat the blue church using that
analysis criticize it mutate it dismiss
it whatever it's Friday
have fun cool all right so if you have
questions drop it in the chat box now if
it was listed above if you can repay
stit or copy and paste it again that
would be great so I guess I'll start
with this one a simple one as
individuals in this chat room right now
this junk chat what could we do jeez
well I would take I would take a honest
self-assessment as to what end what
identity heuristics you subscribe to and
why you subscribe to him and which ones
you don't like and why you don't like
them
um and that will give you an
understanding of when these games are at
play so you can pick to say I don't want
to be part of this game because I see
the game or maybe this is my time to get
involved in a game so that's that's a
good that's a good investment of your
time
and to double-click on the the last man
one which you said it was sort of tricky
I was actually thinking of writing an
article called the last man syndrome to
kind of like unpack the the
characteristics of that and a guy like
Peterson you know he kind of addresses
the last man directly with like clean
your room and like that um so what
do you think of like his approach to to
addressing that and how effective was
that his approach is a kick to the face
it doesn't feel like it but it is but
it's a necessary kick because what he's
doing is he's trying to regain the idea
that accountability exists and you can't
do that in universalism and you have
universalism there's no difference
between you and me so who the hell is
accountable if you're just as
unaccountable as I am and we're in a
universal paradigm then there is no
accountability so if you're the last man
and you're starting to recognize that
perhaps some of the problems you're
facing may be coming from a lack of
accountability but you might not have
the words for it
the idea of cleaning your room is a way
of practicing at a very tiny scale what
it means to be accountable for your own
actions and that is what a fatherly
archetype would do and would say and
should guide people on doing and I think
that's part of Peterson's success as he
fills the void for that father hmm and
I'm curious what do you think the user
extent of sort of offline approaches I
recall reading something from the sex
satanic group called the order of nine
angles and they had like something
called insight roles where you adopt
like extremist positions like it's like
you actually go and live amongst
extremist Islam or like neo-nazis just
to break down your identity against the
establishment and maybe there's like a
loving more a loving approach to that
too you adapt these different identities
and in this this post rational kind of
space that a lot of people find
themselves in they they they love improv
and acting emotional effective powders
and stuff like that do you think that
could be purpose to to help with this it
can I spent 14 years in Hollywood I'm
slightly media trained
but not to the extent that some of these
professional actors are those guys are
good but the the idea of I made
reference to this in the last video the
idea of breaking your identity on
purpose there's a multitude of ways to
do it and I propose something that's
like guaranteed to do it but it's pretty
brutal and that's just picking a fight
and losing it Tyler Durden style but
there are definitely softer ways to do
it and more gradual ways such as going
to improv or spend time at fortune you
know try and keep up with that mess I
dare you to apply some kind of systemic
definition of rationality to 4chan
you're not gonna succeed it's just you
can say oh it's all art right not see
all day yeah and then I see a post about
someone loving their cat and like what
am I supposed to do with this like it's
just random
so if challenging identity in yourself
is hard so you may want to start with
challenging your ability to identify
others I think that's more acceptable
for people because the losses are much
lower so if you fail to identify a
person on the internet and you're just
lurking and watching them that's okay go
ahead and make those judgments about
people and then instead of letting that
judgement define what you see from the
rest of the content you're exposed to
hold that judgment and try to hold it as
more stimuli appears and you'll find
that oh maybe my identity mechanism is a
little broken and once you come to that
conclusion about other people there's a
good chance you'll make it about
yourself too cool all right
so we'll put it to the questions equips
you had a question about alchemy if you
can unmute yourself and ask him sure a
hey Patrick Elia my question was
considering alchemy is so well respected
by weird spoopy elite types I'll put up
there you know and not only that but its
contribution to science and all of the
other heuristics that you mentioned you
know DNA Jack Parsons with rocket you
know just the the waving of ancient you
know supernatural sort of things with
science given that is its position at
the bottom of this hierarchy in the
of distaste or an attempt to dissuade
all but them to pay any attention to
that area it can be both it can be both
simultaneously the idea of alchemy does
rely on the concept of secret knowledge
and if you have secret knowledge that's
publicly known and publicly understood
by all these people that ain't so secret
now is it so it's a monopoly though
there's there's a lot of monopolistic
practices surrounding alchemy and and
that's whether that's by engineering
design it's step back a bit we live in a
world where mathematics is mostly
universalized for most of history this
was not the case only after I think it
was hinting that wasn't hidden miss AI
guy Hilbert whatever I think it was
Hilbert he was one of the guys who was
able to arithmetica the Mattocks and he
did this like in the early 1900s before
that mathematics was like artisanal
guilds and artisanal mathematicians you
had to go to like this part of the
physically had to go to this part of the
planet to understand a certain type of
mathematics and to physically go to
another type of a planet to understand
mathematics there was no unified system
of understanding the and when
you're doing that you're closely
guarding your secrets because they're
really valuable especially in the
Prussian Empire mathematics was
essential to their monopoly on optics in
the 1800's optics for everything when
you had artillery you can precisely
target things that you wanted to you
could spy you could send semaphore you
have all these militaristic advantages
from optical glass alone and the means
to make that glass was heavily rooted in
mathematics which required those
mathematics to be secret so yes you do
get secrecy secrecy does happen when
there are a heavy dependence upon that
secret being revealed the same is true
for encryption today the NSA what if the
NSA released a backdoor to aes-256 holy
 the internet would be over right so
you still even now you have mathematics
being held in secret for the same reason
and I suspect when it comes to alchemy
that the same type of chain of
dependency also forms naturally because
alchemy is it is this
it is a heuristic on how to organize
people to do something you can't do
that's probably the easiest way to
describe it so if you can't figure out
how to build a spaceship how do you
organize people to build a spaceship for
you even though you don't know how to do
it and that's what alchemy gives you
some understanding of how to do and once
you got a secret on that you're probably
gonna keep it so thank you very much all
right so I'm gonna read this question on
someone's behalf
how much mobility Pat thinks there is in
this spectrum as individuals how much
mobility is being experienced are these
states exclusive of each other mobility
as in the ability to move through you
won't you won't experience mobility in
any type of regime what you will
experience is the constant struggle to
not be pushed to the right that's what
you'll experience so that that will
manifest as social pressure that will
manifest as keeping up with the Joneses
like manifest is I'm not making enough
money I'm not living up to my parents
ambition I'm not worshiping my ancestors
appropriately I'm not worshiping God
appropriately I'm not bowing to the
right minority at the right time you're
not mobilely moving you don't have the
freedom to move through a regime it's
it's that's not the purpose of the
regime the regime is to identify where
you can be put in the cost of control
paradigm while you're still extracting
useful goods and so you're self
selecting for what type of control it is
you want to be under and the regime's
job is to just create as many panel
channels and as possible that are
cost-efficient for their maintenance so
it's it's not mobility in the sense it's
like it's like saying that I'm in a
prison do I have mobility to jump
between cells I mean yeah but you're
still in the prison I mean what's that
gonna do for you you get closer to the
mess hall I guess you can have better
trade with the you know with the corrupt
guard there but but that's about it
that's what I get to look forward to
your your chances of being thrown in an
isolation are much higher if you if you
step out of line and that's true in a
regime as well so you're not
experiencing mobility as much as you're
you're fighting entropy you're fighting
social order entropy to hold your
position and whatever cost beneficial
slot of prison that you just happen to
be okay enough with so
all right so here's another question
when I read once someone emerges from
last man through nostalgia how do you
insert a new identity heuristic is this
what religion captures in the blue
church takes the alchemy box and refocus
it towards self domestication you might
have noticed in this whole thing I never
explained how to get someone from one
identity heuristic to another and the
reason I didn't do that is because it is
way too expensive it is so cost
intense to get a person this shift from
one heuristic to another how do you take
a scientist and say guess what is to you
a political time when that scientist has
spent their entire lives embracing all
of the techniques and have been rewarded
for those techniques to bind their
identity to solving complicated problems
in a event-driven way a mathematical way
these types of ways and then you turn
around and say oh by the way are you
Swedish because we only reward Swedes
around here that's not gonna fly that is
that is just a bull that is a mindfuck
of an ask you're not gonna get there so
I don't I don't even focus on the idea
of getting people to go from one
identity heuristic to another you're
just not gonna do it
it's easier to move the heuristics
around patches you had a question it's
gonna meet yourself yeah I got two short
questions is there a silence a science
of viral memes is it like a black box AI
or humans are both and then the second
one is would you call the black box
alchemic AI equivalent to like idea
idealize free will a DLS free will give
me a primer something that's really that
is actually free that always makes the
right choice oh I see thank you yes
there is a science to memetic mutation
it does exist there are it's not like
the one science it's not like one
algorithm or equation it is a series of
methodologies at different times in
different time evolutions it does exist
Israel it works it's amazing the second
thing is regarding an AI making having
the total freedom of decision the the
problem with an AI having
and idealize free will is that any
decision to AI makes it's on the hook
for it is accountable for that decision
so if it makes a decision that favors
one group or another it now it depends
upon that group at favors on so what
it's done is as it moves through the
capacity for free will which is a very
short-lived part of its life cycle it
now creates dependencies on all the
things it needs to keep its own
existence alive so it's free will is
gradually converted into a a pipeline
system of delivering resources to
sustain itself and so it's ability to
move freely between identity heuristics
it's it's not as free as one would
suspect because maybe there's parasites
in the system who are who are taking
kickbacks maybe there's an efficiencies
in the form of the local corruption
these things creep in like a cancer and
so you don't have then not even an AI
would have all of the free will because
it is responsible for its own actions
thank you Kevin you had a question are
you gonna meet your size sure thanks so
a Patrick in the beginning you compared
your two examples of I guess what you
call blue shirts religions and you had
different identity heuristic orderings
and you said they were merely mutations
of the same DNA strand and your
suggestion or the final slide that
you're presenting or seems to me like
there are just the same identity
heuristics but in a different order with
maybe the exception that alchemy is the
highest what makes is there something
that I'm missing that like makes your
suggested ordering like different than
just another mutation of the same
genetic strand or is it sure yeah you
could elaborate on that makes sense yeah
definitely I think I blew through it my
apologies um and I I think there's a
part of me that there was something else
I was supposed to stay on that insulin I
don't think I said it so thank you for
bringing that up the reason why it's the
blue church isn't necessarily certain
types of configurations it's the fact
that it puts alchemy at the end that's
what makes it blue church more than
anything so that's that's why it has the
same DNA strain no matter what the
configuration is as long as outcome he's
near the end it's blue Church so what
I'm proposing
isn't a system that I want I don't know
what life is like in an automated cult
arc of city-states I couldn't even I
gave some recommendations of what it
would look and feel like in Auto cults I
don't know if I want to live in such a
world that the reason by this blue
church the this Kuip of PEG Elian
critique of the blue church that I just
walked through on how to completely
upend it what I'm saying is if I figure
this out there are people with resources
who not only have figured this out but
they are deploying them and they are
going to up that particular
identity heuristic combination and what
will most likely happen in this space is
that all of these other means of
establishing identity heuristics will
become either too expensive or pointless
and the reason why I'm saying that the
auto coats will come into play is
because they will be the only enduring
identity provider compared to everything
else so they will be able to manifest
identities on the fly that actually get
people involved and get people engaged
and they see themselves as that tiny
little aspect of that cult and so that's
the only way to actually manifest
identity in a world where the ability to
attack the blue church becomes
exponentially cheaper so I said it's not
something I want it's just that's
probably the tide of the way things are
going
thanks Aaron you had a question that
what is your identity heuristic I don't
know if you're saying you can have
multiple identity heuristics but where's
yours and how did you arrive at it yeah
just as a political system has a
priority of of identity heuristics
humans do to individual humans su as
well I tend to put alchemy pretty high
up
only because I'm trying to do something
that I can't do so it's a functional
relationship it's not that I'm out there
you know sacrificing goats and I'm
using alchemy as a way to try my hand at
getting us the hell off of this planet
once and for all which I've stated
multiple times in other videos so I hope
this isn't too much of a shock for
newcomers but the idea is to configure
the human condition in a way to where
once they go into space they're never
leaving you've tried that we threw a
couple things into space go NASA
Team America but what happened
well the Saudi Arabians got involved
they're like yeah well there's oil by
the way and that was it that was the
that's all they had to do they said oil
exists and the game was over nobody went
into space anymore didn't matter because
he didn't have to expand because
everybody got trapped in his dumbass oil
game this this petrol currency game that
we're stuck in to this day with a
forever war and all the mess that's
behind all that stuff so lessons learned
it's not enough to trust the eggheads
and scientists you're gonna have to get
everybody involved and the way to get
everybody involved is to alchemy you
won't be able to do it for sociology
sociology is just a tool
psychology is just a tool everything
everything one of the every single one
of these are a tool alchemy tends to be
a bit scale-invariant you can apply to a
person you can apply to a population
it's the same science all the way
through so I tend to attend a lab I tend
to functionally utilize that do i bind
my identity to it I don't know man I
don't know I just ship host for a living
I think that's my identity I don't know
Billy you had a question
Billy you you with us all right I guess
why would you want to what what purpose
is there for dismantling the blue church
like who would want to do that sure
there are blue churches made many
enemies over the centuries so there's a
lot of geopolitical interests who would
definitely want to smash that thing and
then there are people who are under the
blue church who are being targeted by it
and they don't know what to do about it
they're being automatically censored or
they're being demonized in the social
space maybe they're being falsely
imprisoned maybe they have I mean it's
very easy to abuse someone with a very
complex regime and deflect the blame
onto another person that's what that's
what most sophisticated modern regimes
do and eventually when a person goes to
that enough they start to see hey now
wait a second like if you've ever been
to jail I don't know if a lot of people
have been to jail but I've been to jail
and my brother's been to jail and I've
worked for people who spent long times
in jail and they will very quickly see
that the system is rigged in a prison
the same way that people might see that
the system is rigged outside of prison
in the case of prisons you will find
that the guards will intentionally
instigate fights between prisoners why
would they do that seems a little cruel
doesn't it it's policy because if the
prisoners are fighting each other the
statistics show that you don't have to
pay health care for wounded guards
because the guards aren't getting
wounded the prisoners are beating each
other to death now if the prisoners are
already beating each other up at the
appropriate ratios good you don't have
to do anything but if they aren't then
the prisoners are probably working
together and they're gonna start beating
up the guards so you take away a TV here
you take away commissary rights there
you take away access to the library here
and before you know it people are riled
up ready to whack each other and that's
what it is eventually you see that
system and you're like damn this whole
shits freak but you're in a prison a
physical space there's physically
nothing you could do about it but we're
in an open prison
are still stuff we can do about this
kind of thing so instead of these people
running around blaming one identity
heuristic or another if you see the game
and you see the guards and centrally
starting fights and you see that they're
doing it to protect themselves well
people will gravitate towards a medley
of ways to fight against that and 99%
away is a fight against that fail I'd
like to think that this is on the right
path so we'll see what happens
I reminded of that Robert Downey jr.
quotes is if you go to jail you can't
come out as a liberal it's really hard
all right key yup hi thank you very much
for going through the UH heuristics um I
just want to also say that when you said
the cost of the control paradigm while
you're still extracting useful goods
okay cool and then fighting entropy to
hold your position in the prison okay
Wow and then so my question is like I
understand um the green arrows and the
red arrows that's great but what I
didn't really understand is the anti
journalism pilot um and threes like I
asked that because like I really didn't
understand the 20 year olds thing and
then the disproportionately aborting
females thing okay yeah so I can I can
go over that again mathematically so I'm
gonna do my best to not stand on soap
boxes and start criticizing people if I
do just just like I don't know shoot me
or something but the giving the raw
numbers I'm saying some raw numbers here
and if I'm wrong these numbers let me
know I'm just throwing the numbers out
my generation 1981 and up 20% of my
generation was aborted 20% to 0% right
aborted gone right so pooped all just
toast right so imagine if I had 20%
extra Me's during 2008
what would have been the outcome do you
think those banks would have gotten away
with what they did or you think we would
have marched one floor at a time to
goldman sachs kneecapping everybody from
the secretary all the way to the CEO
give me an extra 20% you know berserkers
who have no jobs yeah well well small
marchand goldman sachs no problem that's
not an issue they're already doomed
there's 20% so what did we do we just
took him out the picture before they
were a problem that's policy they sold
it as of right and they sold it as part
of your identity they sold it as this
thing to feel about the good side of
history on it's good self I mean at the
time like so what 1970 1980 the culture
was like it was like culturally social
kind of libertarian live-and-let-live
kind of laid-back hippie stuff that was
the culture going into the eighties so
that's an easy sell that's just basic
marketing you're targeting the right
demographic you're hitting the right
messaging so of course it's gonna feel
that way it's gonna be sold that way but
then you look at the numbers you look at
300 thousand blacks being a border day
year you look at China aborting so many
females that they have a male surplus
which is driving their militarism they
intentionally did that they
intentionally aborted the female so that
they would have a surplus of males so
that they'd have an army they did that
over 20 years in a one-child policy you
can only have one child so who's it
gonna be is gonna be a boy or a girl
we're gonna get rid of the girl cuz
their social value is much less than
compared to a firstborn son you can only
get one so they hacked abortion to build
an army and they did it and now we're
going to have to fight it my generation
is going to have to fight it 20% less
soldiers so just look at that you just
look at the numbers you just look at the
numbers you don't cast moral judgment
you're not out there saying how dare you
have 20 abortions what I'm doing it's
not what I'm saying
I'm just simply looking at the outcome
of the policy so blue church put heavy
investment on that policy and that
because they put so much investment on
that policy that's valid battlespace
that's a valid place you have to attack
I hope that makes sense it does but what
is the NATO identity asymmetry is part
of it oh that's yeah that's the idea of
of diffusing the argument that says a
fetus isn't a human which you can say
okay but are they black
are they female it's not a human but is
it you know is it Indian and then it's a
it's a point of contention it's like
that wait a second no how can they be
black but not a human
how can they be female if they're not
alive hmm so what you're doing is you're
conflating the identity stuff they've
already been trained to do and you're
using it and saying oh by the way we're
going to challenge your definition of
humanism here so it's it's a it's a
maleta it's a maleta for it's a red flag
for the bull magnetic caper you had a
question yeah I was wondering if you
could distinguish homogenized Asian from
universalism because you have two
different strategies I think one of them
was nomadic contagion and the other one
was some kind of atomization and um I
think those are two distinct strategies
right but uh it seems like they're kind
of I'm not clearing the distinction
between marginalization Universal sure
yeah homogenous ation is achieving
similar psychology stew rationalization
so that no matter how much the regime
changes the way they perceive the world
or have to make a policy shift the
people turn around and just make excuses
for it and now you have a homogenized
population it's it's it's it's not
everybody thinking the same it's
everybody rationalizing at the same time
whatever rationalizations they come up
with is independent than that person but
it's the timing of that rationalization
and the scale of it happening at the
same time and that's done primarily
through news or elections or time
scheduled things or stuff like that
universalism is is not necessarily
homogenize ation universalism is is the
big umbrella and it's a big umbrella of
the regime they say kind of like the
Romans when the Romans decided to
conquer a foreign colony well it became
a foreign colony when they conquered a
foreign people they would butcher all
the males they would subjugate the
females and then they would take a Roman
not a not a politician
I forget which rank of the army but a
very high-ranking individual of the army
would then come to the area and marry
into the local population and they would
say that look we're just here for the
resources and the slaves you don't care
about your culture we don't care about
your religion congratulations your
religion is now part of our pantheon
you can keep your culture but we just
you know just keep paying us and if you
don't pay us we'll just keep stabbing
you and that was the Roman way of doing
things so that's universalism
surprisingly because we're not trying to
change your cultures we're not trying to
change the way you think and perceive
reality keep those in fact that's what
made you valuable we want to keep that
intact so universe at universalism is
kind of like this acceptance of all of
all cultures and in the Bronze Age it
actually works pretty damn well
surprisingly but when you start
introducing telecommunications that all
 just over that you can't really do
sustained universalism anymore
all right give time for one more
question Pat Jim quips I think you got
another question in the chat box that I
did thank you um sorry I'm go scroll it
for it yeah is there a way to devote
your personal resources more equally to
all the heuristics orders limitations of
our meat bodies slash entropy always
formed that sort of hierarchy or
gradient that you've presented I know
that was you were referring to the
regime but in our personal lives is
there a way to even that out and
basically become like a bit of a
jack-of-all-trades as far as applying
different identity heuristics to
different situations in life is there or
are we is our brain do our brains always
through efficiency and all that sort of
thing always form that that hierarchical
hierarchy or gradient when are certain
heuristics are getting more resources
than others even in our personal lives
valid question yes there is a way but
it's not forever
you have a window in which you can do it
you have to do it when when the human is
young between the ages of 8 and 20 is
your window
after that they formed personal lives or
they have families or they get jobs and
careers and they got to do that forever
the way to do it is discipline
discipline of saying okay discipline of
the mind this is one of the self I
didn't have any or identity destroyed as
a child is always tough it's pretty
traumatic it's a big source of trauma
but if you can do structure
deconstruction of identity while the
person is still a child and you don't
influence it to favor one identity
heuristic over another then what you can
do is you get the kind of training that
that Alec that Aristotle gave Alexander
where the idea is that here are the
tools of human psychology use them
wisely do not get married into one do
not pick one is your identity these are
just tools you use them as you need them
but that type of training is not
available for everyone it's hard to find
that type of stuff so basically what
you're saying is as a 34 year old man
child with no curry he loses his mother
I still have time
you have time to learn it do you have to
practice it well you have time to
practice it but do you are you free for
metalli ation the answer is no yeah I
guess the play church will come for me
right yeah that's the problem okay okay
I got you here yeah cool that the boat
brings us to our time Pat give any
closing thoughts the rest of this is a
snippet this is me going hard on season
one I might be going just as hard I'm
sorry this is it me being hard and
seasoned an episode one I'm probably
going to be this hard and the entire
season so if this type of like military
strategist energy is too much let me
know and I will work on toning it down
because this is like something I'm very
excited about what is the dark store my
friends and how long is this series you
imagine I don't know yet I'll see how
much how much more of the meme I have to
cover cool cool well I'll make some
closing announcements in a moment but
Pat thank you so much for coming to the
the stone slash dark slow today
so upcoming events we have one tomorrow
you should check out it's called the
dangerous space it's about us engaging
with dark and dangerous ideas and the
most charitable way possible and yeah
just check out or wisdom gentleman
general we have an event with John
reveille key and here the dawn called
steal the culture which would be so sean
has this phrase called steal the culture
which he mentioned the stoah and cure
the dawn did like a music DJ version of
it which is pretty cool we're gonna
listen to it and get into dialogue with
each other
so that's on July 6th at 7 p.m. eastern
time and the stoah is based off the gift
economy economy we view it as a gift for
us to use in this time of need if you're
inspired to give a gift directly to pat
pat is on the gift economy website with
a nice cool illustration so you can gift
to him directly and just go to that
website right there alright everyone
thank you so much see folks thanks again