well do I need this on no cuz I'm
through this right or do I need it up
we're gonna be starting in a few minutes
just working out some final bugs some of
the comments are getting cut off on the
side right here okay that's great thank
you
you
we're gonna be starting in one minute
just getting everything
we lined up hello everyone welcome this
is our first Q&A we'll be doing some
more of these in the future I hope
you'll be patient with me this is my
first time I'm doing this and I'm just
getting familiar with all of this
technology I'd like to introduce two of
the people that are part of my team and
really helped me with all of this come
on in guys and say hello introduce
yourselves
that's a amar and Karina so they're
gonna be helping me out today and
throughout these and you might at some
time be receiving messages from them on
my behalf so please be open to that and
responsive to what they have to say and
do thanks thanks guys all right so this
is what I'm planning on doing right now
I'm going to spend the first 45 minutes
going through the questions that have
already been texted and posted on the
videos and what I've done there is I've
tried to gather
together clusters of questions questions
that all sort of belong together so I
won't be answering so much individual
questions I'll be answering questions
that were posed sort of multiple times
to me by multiple people I of course
can't get to all the questions and then
in the last 45 minute sorry the last 15
minutes of the hour I'll go through some
of the questions that are live right now
and try to respond to them so one of the
first set of questions we got was just
general questions about how the series
is going to progress and I wanted to say
first right off the bat that I've been
deeply appreciative of the responses
that I've been getting the commentary
both quantitatively and qualitatively
has been excellent there's been a lot of
commentary and so much of it has been
insightful and philosophically
reflective and the way people are
interacting with each other on the
commentary has been respectful and
there's been a pursuit of a common
culture of open discourse and dialogue
and I want to encourage that that's
exactly what I'm looking for and and
I've been helped by the kind of feedback
and encouraged about all of this so many
of you are asking how long does the
series go and there the plan is if your
hope you're ok with this the plan is to
do 50 5-0 episodes and the idea is to
split it between 25 episodes where I go
over the historical argument the
historical analysis which you're seeing
right now unfolding on the series and
then the the last 25 I'm doing the
cognitive scientific analysis of the the
processes of meaning generation but of
course those are rough divisions as
we're doing the history you see me
putting in lots of cognitive science and
as we do the cognitive science I will be
constantly alluding back and building on
the history and the idea behind that is
we need this dual answer as I argued at
the beginning of this series to really
try and address the meaning crisis we
need to the historical and just the
historical analysis to tell us what
we've lost and what it means and then we
need the cognitive scientific analysis
to tell us about
the cognitive processes and functions
that we need to address if we're going
to respond and potentially awaken from
the meaning crisis some of you have
asked if the video series is going to be
put into a book so right now what's
happening is I'm continuing the series
of books that I started with Christopher
Master Pietro and Philip missive ik many
of you are reading that and again I
appreciate your feedback on that book
the zombie book there is this year
there's going to be a sequel to that
book called unsheltered which will go
over this genealogy
of the meaning crisis in more detail it
won't be a verbatim copy from the series
but it will be running the argument in a
more literary form in addition to that
there'll be another book coming out
called the cognitive continuum from
insight to enlightenment which will be
about the cognitive science arguments
about what's going on an insight what's
going on in flow what's going on a
mystical experience what's going on in
the higher states of consciousness
that's going to be integrated together
and I'm working on that now right now
with Daniel Craig and Madeline Abram Ian
so that's also coming out and that will
have a lot of stuff verbatim from the
video series and also from a series of
talks I've given on altered states of
consciousness finally some of you have
asked in connection with that if I'm
going to be doing any public appearances
soon I will be giving a talk at the
upcoming conference by the Buddhism
psychology and mental health Union data
Mars the 30th repose both on the video
Channel and on Twitter about location
and I will be talking there about the
work I've done on mindfulness it's
connection to spirituality and the
cultivation of wisdom so the next series
of questions actually relate that topic
of mine from many of you asked me if I
can go into a little bit more detail
about the distinction between meditation
and contemplation now this goes to work
that I published
with the Ferraro in 2016 and the the
point I was trying to make there is that
we in the West have tended to collapse
mindfulness into a single practice a
single psycho technology usually
meditation whereas if you look the
cultural ecology of mindfulness
practices for example Buddhist countries
particularly of practicing something
like the Eightfold Path they often have
a set of the technologies and some of
them are meditative and some of them are
contemplative I myself was taught three
psycho technologies in an integrated
fashion of a pasta meditation Metta Emmy
TPA Austin called loving-kindness
contemplation and Tai Chi Chuan now
what's the basic difference that the
basic difference between them is that in
the past not in meditation you're
basically to use a metaphor I use in the
series you're learning to step back and
look at your cognitive processing so
you're moving towards the center which
is connoted by the word meditation right
to mediate is to be centered right and
what you're doing there is for example
in the past none of the meditation
practice that I practice your your what
you're doing is focusing on the breath
that's being generated in your abdomen
by your breathing so normally think
about this we don't look at our
sensations we're looking through them at
the world and we're automatically
rushing through our mental framing and
our experience onto the world and then
what we need to do often is become aware
of how we're miss framing our situations
and our problems and then at a very
basic level misconstruing them and so
what meditation does is it teaches you
to step back and look at your sensations
and looks at look at the patterns and
processes that are unfolding in the mind
but of course if I simply step back and
look at my glasses right that would
render me free forever uncapable of
seeing the world again so in a
contemplative practice what you do is
you're now learning because
of your awareness that has been afforded
to you through the meditative practice
you're learning how to read look through
your mental framing become aware of it
and so your attention to it there is
generally directed outwards so whereas
the focus in meditation is very sort of
cognitive and unconscious net and on
consciousness right the focus and
contemplation is on that existential
mode that I've been talking about in
this series so you're trying to see on
the process of how you're assuming and
is signing identities you're trying to
see how you are fundamentally what do
you are for grounding and back rounding
in reality so for example if you're
contemplating the three marks of
existence you're trying to learn to see
the world as impermanent and
interconnected so and this relates to
the meaning of contemplation it has its
origin and contemplate AO temple that
the part of the sky that you're looking
out to to get some some sense of what's
in the depths of reality so basically
what you should be doing is practicing
both a meditative meditative practice to
take the lens off so to speak by the
analogy and to become aware of how
you're framing things and then you need
to practice contemplation practice
bringing into awareness how you are
looking at the world how are you are
assuming and assigning identities what
properties and relations sets of objects
constellations of events are you for
grounding which ones are you back
grounding and the idea is if I do both
of those if I if I practice those I'm
going to train the two things I need in
order to increase my capacity for
insight but precisely because I'm doing
a contemplative practice this insight
isn't going to be like of a particular
intellectual problem like the 9.com or
something like that it's going to be an
insight into my existential mode the the
very way in which my identity is being
right co-created with the identity of
the odd
and the situations and the events that
are occurring around me so one of my
criticisms the the criticisms that Leo
Leo Ferraro and I made was precisely
that the West has tended to reduce the
idea of mindfulness to simplistically to
meditation and it has also tended to
reduce what is being sought after in the
meditation and meditative practice it
hasn't been appropriately
or deeply linked to this the the the
contemplative practice that is needed to
afford a fundamental transformation at
the level of your identity now you'll
get you'll get those those more higher
up types of insights you'll get
cognitive and intellectual insights if
you're practicing a lot of meditation
and contemplation there's already
experimental work showing this both for
mindfulness meditation and contemplative
practices like Metta and of course the
other thing you have to remember is that
that those cognitive insights and the
more existential ones aren't independent
they influence and affect each other in
a powerful manner so I hope that gives
you some sense of the difference between
meditation contemplation and why we need
both some of you have asked me why I
what what I think about the pasta as a
style I've practiced a few other styles
of meditation and I find the pasta very
good precisely because of the emphasis
on the sensations generated by the
breath paying attention to the
sensations a really powerful way to step
back and look at the mind and the breath
is a really great thing to follow
because it's always with you it leaks
the inner and outer worlds together and
it seems to me so now I'm not III I
don't want to speak with false false
precision here is to answer that
question with some sort of authority
would mean I would have I'd be a
connoisseur of many different styles
like this
the kind of thing you have to practice
to get a sense of I mean I can compare
but past not to meta to some some Zen to
some stoic meditative and contemplative
practices also to mindfulness practices
like yoga and Tai Chi and one of the
things that I found is that the the way
the pastner's design is it integrates
very well with the contemplative
practices and the moving practices so
that's how I would respond to the
question about the power of a past now
some of you have asked me how you go
about starting a practice I recommend
very strongly that you need to get
involved with somebody in person
meditation is like making love it only
in this sense it's something you have to
do with somebody who understands it and
has practiced it for you to get an
understanding of it books are great and
they should be read after or along the
way now of course the thing that you
need to know about that is you have to
be very careful about selecting a
meditation instructor a good thing is if
you can get some sense of the tradition
they belong to and see if it's an
established vetted one see if they have
been vetted by any independent
organizations or groups of users also
it's important if you begin with a
teacher what is the focus there's
something I tell my students when I'm
recommending what to do after they've
taken the course I teach what's the
focus is to focus the teacher or is the
focus the teaching right and it's the
focus of the teaching on your
transformation or on you feeling good
right meditation should never be a
vacation from life meditation should
always be an education about the depths
of life and so you should be choosing a
instructor that is focused on the
teaching and the teaching should be
emphasizing transformation and
challenging you to the growth
and the awareness and insight that you
are no doubt probably seeking now what I
will tell you about this and this is
something you should be open to is your
reason for starting meditation will
change I mean your reason for doing
meditation will will change as you do
meditation you'll go into meditation
because you're interested in relaxing or
getting more peace of mind and as you go
on and discover more why you're doing
meditation will change for you and I
would recommend to you that that's also
a criterion you pay attention to if
you're engaged in a practice and you're
not getting that sense of growth and
that your understanding and the goals
you're pursuing are deepening in the
practice then again you are there's a
chance you want to reconsider where and
who you're learning to practice with
it's better if you practice with other
people because it generally means you'll
stick with the practice if you practice
on your own chances are you won't keep
it up the next thing I would recommend
to you is that you do not get into
meditation by going on a retreat
retreats are very powerful very
transformative and for that reason they
can be very overwhelming and very
disruptive I would recommend taking a
meditation course practicing for at
least a year before you consider going
on a meditation retreat so I hope that
answers a lot of the sort of practical
questions I received about meditation
contemplation starting a practice the
power of a pasta now this relates to
another bunch of questions that I got
all around that are along the following
lines well John this is all really great
theory but how does this translate into
practice
people were saying is this all like
other than meditating or doing CBT like
what does this all come down to well I
mean I don't want to steal too much
thunder from the end of the series
because there's gonna be several
episodes that are beginning to be
directed at this and I've also got some
videos out there
giving some instruction on how to do
some of these practices so just to give
a broad overview I mean what I'm going
to propose to you is right that we need
a system of ciclo technologies that are
integrated together for dealing with
perennial problems that beset us as
meaning-making cognitive agents and of
course what those are I haven't talked
about yet but you've seen a few of them
right you've seen the modal confusion
we've talked about the parasitic
processing these so the idea of the
perennial problems are the following we
are vulnerable to forms of self
deception and self destruction precisely
because of the very processes that make
us adaptive so the very processes that
afford our adaptive cognition are
exactly the same ones that make us
vulnerable to self-deception self
destruction and so that is why their
perennial problems they are endemic to
us as cognitive meaning-making
agents and so one of the things I would
propose to you is that what what we're
looking for is a systematic set of
psycho technologies CBT would be one
component of it but I would suggest to
you that CBT is actually bart part of a
larger set around psycho technologies
called octave open-mindedness
mindfulness detective technologies would
be some other ones flow induction are
other ones anyways the idea is a set how
do they organize together and that
structural functional organization has
to be directed to this how can they in a
coordinated and integrated fashion deal
with the perennial problems that beset
us in a way that is also responsive to
our historical situation where we have
got to with respect to the you know the
increasing presence in our life in our
culture of the meaning crisis so there's
a there's a lot of sort of design
demands on what we're looking for we
need a psycho set of psycho technologies
that are properly constructed in terms
of our best cognitive science
that would help us to best address the
perennial problems and also have a
intellectually respectful and I would
even say intellectually respectable and
even say perhaps you know potentially
profound way of addressing the cultural
historical situation than the meaning
crisis has put us in so this idea about
all this theory being translated in
practice is exactly the tea loss of this
whole series right in the end and and
this is why I'm teaching hope ultimately
in the end in the end I want afford
people away a you know this systematic
set of psycho technologies not because
it's exhaustive or a complete but as an
exemplar of how people could turn all of
this theory into practice and thereby
address the meaning crisis both as a
cultural entity and as a cognitive you
know process that's operational within
their own lives and minds so that I mean
I don't mean to I'm not trying to
dismiss by being promise there but there
this is what the whole series is going
to build towards and I'm going to also
incorporate some episodes of giving
practical instruction on how to do some
of these psycho technologies I have a
few videos out there already on that but
that is definitely going to be addressed
all right so some of you have also asked
me some questions about cognitive
science and we haven't got in this
series to the explanation of cognitive
science we've already filmed some of
those and so I know what's coming for
you and I'm going to basically going to
give a whole episode sort of dedicated
to introducing to you what cognitive
science is so that is definitely coming
but just to give you an idea some of you
been asked me because I've been
referring to third-generation coxide
about you know can I recommend some
Dawson's book which I have my office
mind/body in world I think is an
excellent introduction to the three here
I'm just getting it now
Omar thanks all right so here's here's a
really good book just in to recommend it
it's not an easy read this is you do not
take this book to the beach because you
will you will get too engrossed in it
and died of a sunburn or you won't
possibly be able to give it the
attention it deserves but this is an
excellent book for describing the feed
three generations really excellent book
I would also recommend you take a look
at mark Rowland's book the new science
of the mind because it gives an
excellent presentation of third
generation cognitive science and also to
discuss some of the issues that are
essential to it like the ideas of
extended mind and embodied cognition
also not a book that you could just pick
up and read if you don't have some
introductory education on cognitive
science or philosophy of mind but that's
where I would recommend you look if you
want to get some ideas about this I
don't want to say too much more about
cognitive science right now because as I
said there's going to be basically 25
episodes dedicated to explaining what it
is and also giving you an example I'm
gonna exemplify how you practice
cognitive science I'm gonna do cognitive
science with you as we move through the
analysis of the cognitive machinery of
meaning-making so I'm hoping between
those recommendations the explanation
and the exemplification you'll get a
very good answer to this question about
what is cognitive science and especially
what is third-generation
cognitive science so the next series of
questions had to had to do with this a
central theme running through it sorry I
really appreciate these questions by the
way many of your saying hello and hi and
hi to everyone and again it's great to
have you all
coming in and saying hello and sending
me your comments and your support so
again I can't stop and say hi to
everybody but again thank you so much so
the next series of questions have to do
with this issue about difficulties
surrounding integrating science and
spirituality and I think I think that's
very important it's it's a very I mean
it's the central problem in a sense that
the series is trying to tackle because
how do I say this I don't want to be I I
don't want to be dismissive of other
people's work III really do it's really
important to me some of you may have
heard this when I was doing the podcast
with Peter Lindbergh
and David cazuli about how important it
is to exemplify a standard of practice
for how we dialogue with each other so
I'm gonna this is in my mind right now
as I try to answer these questions it's
important to me that I do something
answering those questions like what I
have to do in cognitive science and what
do I mean by this when I'm doing
cognitive science one of the things that
I have to do and some of you've seen it
already in some of the videos I often
have to bridge between different
disciplines there's a video at TEDx talk
out there on cognitive science saves the
deconstructive mind and so if you want
to get this argument in more detail you
can take a look at that but the idea is
there are many disciplines we talk about
the mind at different levels you have
neuroscience talking about the brain
machine learning talking about
information processing you have
psychology talking about behavior and
they use different methods psychology
uses experimentation neuroscience much
more direct observation a machine
learning you're actually creating
simulations they talk about different
entities like neural networks or working
memory and so what what you have to do
in a cognitive scientists as a cognitive
scientist is you often have to try and
bridge between these disciplines and the
really tricky thing is right is to
bridge in a way that respects what each
discipline is doing
right and at the same time creates a
meaningful connection so that they can
mutually and inform and transform each
other in an insightful manner and so I
see what I'm trying to do this project
that I'm engaged with you you people on
is create that kind of relationship
between science and spirituality where I
I can preserve and what and respect what
each one contributes while also creating
a conceptual vocabulary a theoretical
grammar that will allow them to talk to
each other and mutually afford each
other we've got a cultural grammar that
makes them antagonistic antithetical to
each other
disparate and disconnected from each
other fragmented you can already see
this and so I and this is where I'm
trying to not be dismissive of other
people but I do not like solutions to
this issue that are dismissive of one
side or the other of this relationship
so attempts to sort of undermine the
legitimacy the power the importance of
science and the scientific worldview
sort of nostalgic attempts to get away
from it or undermine it I will defend
science against those I understand why
some people do them and by the way this
does not mean that people should not
engage in philosophic ratite or the
scientific worldview they should there
you know Jonathan pazzo does this paul
van der clay does this there's good work
I have disagreements with them
I think there's ways in which science
can be defended and respond to some of
their criticisms but their criticisms I
respect them and they need to be taken
seriously and that's part of what I mean
by respecting this but people who want
to sort of nostalgic lis you know
dismiss science and the scientific
worldview under very pejorative terms
like materialism you know that you have
to be careful about how you're thinking
about this right most scientists for
example and at least ones who care about
the philosophical foundations of science
and there are many that do by the way
wouldn't consider themselves materialist
they would consider themselves
physicalists a materialist is somebody
who thinks that the only reality is
matter the physicalist thinks no no
reality consists of any things that we
can study in relation to the ontology
provided to us by physics so relations
and time and space and energy and
patterns and structural functional
organizations and self-organizing
processes like life and evolution those
are all legitimate things right so you
have to be careful about your
relationship to science but on the on
the other hand you have to be very
respectful to spirituality one of the
things I regularly and reliably do is
that when I can do this when I'm with
people on my students in my classes is I
ask people for example who belong to
particular religious traditions if they
felt that I was treating them in a
respectful manner and what I find very
encouraging is that they will often
respond to say that I what I said they
found helpful or useful for them
deepening their own reflection and
existential inhabitation
of their own religious or spiritual or
worldview so the difficulty is Right
maintaining that that equilibration
trying to generate a discourse that is
mutually respectful but is willing to
provoke each side to be willing to
change and reformulate so that
insightful and purposeful communication
and dialogue can occur between them and
so that's that is an overriding
constraint throughout the whole of the
production of the series and and when
I'm interacting with other people
alright very much I'm trying to give
people I'm a practitioner on both sides
I think that's a fair thing to say about
me but the practitioner on both sides
and and I'm also somebody who has
developed by training because of my
expertise is designed to build bridges
between disparate discourses and so I'm
not saying I'm not offering myself as an
ultimate authority but I think I have
the relevant expertise to try and face
that difficulty without trying you know
to create sort of utopic visions or
dismissive nostalgia or any of the any
of the ways that try to deal with this
issue of science and spirituality by
dismissing one of the two poles so that
would be my answer to that it is the
central difficulty but also to the
degree to which we can succeed it's it's
one of the I think one of the great
things we can possibly do for addressing
the meaning crisis I think any any
attempt to address the meaning crisis
that is not scientifically sound I don't
think is going to get the cultural power
and make the impact on cognition that it
can in comparison to a scientifically
sound response to the meeting crisis I
also think that any attempt to respond
to the meaning crisis that just says
that science can do this for us that we
do not have to pay attention to systemic
sets of psycho technologies cultural
institutions that engage our
perspectival and participatory knowing
and processes of transformation
I think should is also not going to get
the ability to transform culture
consciousness and cognition and
community in the ways that we need to do
it without sort of in order to address
the meaning crisis I got a question
about many questions about enlightenment
some of them were very technical
questions about specific aspects of
different schools of Buddhism and I have
a general policy that if I do not have
the relevant expertise I will not offer
opinions on things I think it is
dangerous to opine without knowledge or
wisdom and so on though
specific things I'm afraid I'm not the
person to answer your questions I can
answer questions about aspects within
the the passage tradition broad
principles of Buddhist metaphysics and
how they relate to Western metaphysics
but on specifics about that I'm sorry I
I don't have the relevant expertise to
answer those questions what I can say is
and I'm aware of the potential hubris in
this but what I can say is what I'm
going to try and offer you is a thing
that bridges between the science of the
spirituality and try and offer in this
mutually respectful manner
a cognitive scientific account of what
enlightenment is the basic idea is that
when we talk about enlightenment we're
talking about assist a systematic set of
psychic technologies that brings about a
comprehensive transformation in human
beings such that they have an
alleviation of the perennial problems
that beset us because of the adaptive
nature the fundamental adaptive nature
of our cognition and meaning making and
so I think we should stop sorry that's
too strong I apologize I think it would
be a good idea to just to to not just
look at people who claim to be
enlightened and what their experience is
like to try and figure out what
enlightenment is we've been doing that
for a long time and so I shouldn't say
we should stop doing that what I am is
suggesting is we should try and reverse
engineer enlightenment I mean this is
one of the things you do in cognitive
science you reverse engineer things what
do I mean by that let's figure out what
are the perennial problems that we need
to have a solution to and then reverse
engineer what are the changes in
consciousness and cognition character
and community that would afford
significant amelioration or alleviation
to those perennial problems and let's
call that fundamental transformation
enlightenment and however it might be
ensconced within particular religious
traditions or vocabulary is one thing
but let's get at what we actually need
to do now in order to address these
issues if you don't want to call that
enlightenment and you want to reserve
that
for a specific religious historical
event or state that's fine but that is
how I'm going to use that term and we
are definitely going to talk in depth
about that some of you who are going to
be tuning in this week to the next
episode about the Buddha we're gonna be
talking about some of these states of
awakening and you can seal beag at the
beginning of that argument taking shape
in connection with this study of
Buddhist metaphysics I was asked a
really really good question
and I want to answer that question it's
because it gives me an opportunity to
address something that I'm going to talk
about later in this series but I haven't
mentioned yet so I've been asked do I
know anything about the kyoto school and
the kyoto school for those of you who
aren't aware of it was a movement of
Japanese philosophers in the 20th
century that purposely tried to do
something very similar to what I'm
trying to do in this series hence why
the question was asked of me no doubt
the kyoto philosophers were trying to
integrate aspects of Buddhism as most
especially in Zen Buddhism but also some
Pure Land Buddhism with Western
philosophy particularly the work of
William James and the work of Martin
Heidegger and also some of the early
phenomenologist so the kyoto school is
trying to do exact we're trying to do
something very analogous to this kind of
bridging that i'm interested in and so
the answer to the question do i know
about the kyoto school the answer to
that is a resounding yes I have read
several of Nishat Annie's books I I
would go so far as to say this I once I
mean it's not an easy read but I think
Nishat Annie's book religion and
nothingness is one of the top five books
I would recommend people read if they
want a profound response to the the
metaphysical epistemological and
existential issues surrounding nihilism
it is it is it is a superlative I would
I don't use this word often but I
consider that book a masterpiece and I
I'm grateful for the fact that I got to
read nishitani is religion to
nothingness I've also read a lot of
machetes work very very interesting also
a lot of muscle Ivy's work I'm
particularly like some of the work that
Abby did on dojin and also some
connections that he's made to Jung and
Tillich which are very appropriate so
the answer is the Kyoto school deeply
informs a lot of my thinking and I will
come to them when we get deeper into the
towards the end of this series and we
talk about current people trying to
respond to the meeting crisis like Jung
and Tillich and Corbin and the kyoto
school etc one thing I would want to say
on this is and I won't get it in a two
minute too much right now but I've
spoken this here and there is the kyoto
school and people like Tillich and I
would also argue Jung bring out bring
about a possibility of of a particular
metaphysics that is relevant to
spirituality which is the position of
non theism and non-theism is the idea
that the relationship to the sacred
should not be framed in the grammar and
language of either theism or atheism but
that it needs to that grammar that
structure needs to be transcended in a
very powerful way and we'll talk about
what that means and why I think that is
particularly relevant to us today and
why I think that is a good way of
understanding one of the contributions
that the Kyoto School has made to the
project that I have the great good
fortune to be engaged in right now with
you some of you have asked about who's
my favorite philosopher that that's an
interesting question it's kind of like
asking of all the people you've had
romantic relationships with who's your
favorite it's it's kind of a dangerous
question because you're afraid of being
disloyal or or undermining what
past people have meant to you um I guess
if I had to be desert island kind of
thing I just got this book today
yesterday and so I'm really thrilled
from it because I've read a lot of it I
got the I got the complete unabridged
work in one volume of Latinas so that
would be the book I would take to my
desert island applet eNOS is my favorite
philosopher not because I don't have
deep criticisms of him and you'll see
some of these later when we come back to
this non-theistic position that refuses
to decide like I think nishitani argued
between emergence bottom-up and
emanation top to emerge temporal
emergence up and eternal emanation down
I think choosing or prioritizing either
one of those as we sometimes are led to
do in either theism or atheism I think
is part of what should be criticized in
terms of the shaytani so I have
criticisms of Latinas along those lines
but nevertheless I mean leading
Platonists is it's such a joy I mean
Plato's my first philosopher so he'll
always have a special role but the
reason why I like platanus is because
he's got he's this great he like he's
like the grand unified field theory of
ancient philosophy because in him you
have integrated you know the science of
Aristotle you have the spirituality of
Plato you have the existential project
of the Stoics and when you're reading
him the discourse is so beautiful is
simultaneously like this logical
argumentation and this spiritual
exercise designed to actually transform
and alter your state of consciousness so
I I find reading platini's a it's like
going to a dojo for your consciousness
in your cognition it is radically
transformative for me another
philosopher who comes sort of second
precisely because of satisfying that
broad set is Spinoza and I like Spinoza
because for me Spinoza represents and I
think this is kind of explicit there's
at least some allusions in Spinoza's
title and some of his terminology to the
neo platonic tradition but Spinoza is
bringing
that whole unification that was afforded
by the Neoplatonic heritage into the
advent of the Scientific Revolution so
in about five minutes I'm going to start
addressing some live questions I want to
take one more question that people have
been asking me in general so these are
questions are around insight because
I've been talking a lot about insight
and they want to know questions about
what's the relationship why do I
emphasize insight so much what's the
relationship between insight and
creativity
insight and wisdom I have a much longer
argument for that that question and you
can go on line I have a youtube series
on my thinking and reasoning course that
does extensive work on the psychology of
insight and it's connection to
creativity and I think the relationship
between insight and creativity is quite
deep so trying to answer it in five
minutes
a so please please forgive me if I'm
seeming to Brust but I'm gonna try and
give the gist of what I what I think
that the difference is I think both
insight and creativity are using the
same cognitive machinery of reframing
you know how we're formulating our
problems and sizing up situations I
think the difference one of the primary
differences is that insight tends to be
focused on getting a solution to the
problem so it's about problem solving
whereas I think creativity to pick up on
arlynn and some other people's work I
think that creativity is using that
machine machinery to find problems I
think what's interesting about
creativity is finding a good problem and
formulating it in such a way that we see
it's profound in important connections
to other problems and then perhaps also
insightfully responding to it I think
that's the hallmark of creativity and I
think for that reason that creativity
involves not just this carbon
Machinery of reframing our problems I
think creativity also involves a a modal
shift where we're shifting into a way of
interpreting our situation and our
surroundings that is very conducive to
the flow State I'll talk a little bit
about this again later
Michael op there's work on the telic and
the parrot ellic Mehta motivational
States to put it in sort of a phrase
that I think is helpful and after uses
those terms creativity what you're more
in a work mode when you're when you're
trying to get an insightful solution to
a problem but when you're creatively
doing problem finding you're much more
in a play mode and that has important
impact on your modal relationship you
tend to be more often in the being mode
rather than the having mode and it also
has important aspects on your
motivational connection when you're
you're you're doing that now I think the
relationship between insight and wisdom
is more profound and I don't think I
don't think we should equate them but I
think there's something central about
the connection between insight and
wisdom that's why I think it seems
strange to us if we say you know sorry
it doesn't seem strange to us if we say
well that person's not very creative but
they're very wise that's okay or you
know that person right doesn't have a
lot of scientific knowledge but they're
very wise yeah we can sort of yeah I get
that wisdom isn't the same thing as
knowledge that's the same thing is it
but if we say you know that person's
wise but they're not very insightful
that mote like what I and I do work on
this right people know that's wrong wise
people right should have insight that
doesn't mean they're necessarily better
at things like the $9 but I could pick
up on one of the metaphors that I've
introduced in the chorus right as the
child is to the adult the adult is to
the sage you have more advanced
cognition because you've gone through
developmental stages and you can think
of those developmental stages in Piaget
as systematic sets of insight it's not
an insight into this problem or this
problem it's finding a systematic
pattern of error and having an insight
that transforms all of those problems in
a coordinated manner and so I think that
when we're talking about wisdom we're
talking about a systemic insight that
puts us through a developmental change
and also the level of the insight is not
just a cognitive level it's the
existential level of the actual project
by which we are engaged in assuming and
I said assigning identities in in the
world one more quick shout out before I
turn to some of the live questions so
there's been general questions about how
to make my work more accessible I would
point to you to an excellent series of
videos that are being done right now by
think big animation the videos are very
high quality they're about 15 minutes
long each they're animated and they give
excellent in my opinion overview
summation insightful presentation of
this argument in a way that is very
accessible I'd also point to the work of
Paul Van der clay he has released of the
whole series of videos where he's
commenting and criticizing in a
constructive and respectful manner I
would also point out my work and I
deeply appreciate of that and many
people are saying that they're finding
his exposition helpful for understanding
the work that I'm doing here now okay so
I want to now turn to some of the on
live questions again I can't promise to
get to them all so let's begin with some
of them where would you start with -
well here's the thing don't start with
both - if you start with latinas it
would be like jumping into a blackbelt
class right that would you
you're gonna get you're gonna get kicked
to the ground intellectually I would
recommend that you first of all read
some Plato because Platina sees himself
as an intellectual descendant of Plato
and an interpreter of Plato and then I
would highly recommend that you read
some books by Pierre hadou first I would
recommend that you read what is ancient
philosophy by Pierre hadou and that you
also read the simplicity of vision by
Pierre hadou explaining to you
neoplatonism you might also want to take
a look at some of the works of our third
or suus there's a book called photonic
mysticism that I think is an excellent
introduction to all of us after going
through that introductory material
reading some Plato then I would
recommend you start with latina tsa's
treat treatise on Beauty I think that's
a good place to start and a way of
trying to get access into Platanos and
then you might want some commentaries to
guide you through the various and the
aids so that's how I would recommend
doing that yes we are going to ask the
question are you going to set up a way
there the community can help support you
financially
first of all just heartfelt thanks that
many of you have been saying you want to
donate and support first of all I want
to make I want to make something clear I
want to treat any of those donations
under the intent I think they're given
they are intended to afford doing this
video work and I think also I'm going to
interpret them as also supporting the
science I have a lab here the
consciousness and wisdom studies lab
that is generating a lot of this work
and very happy to work with these bright
minds and so the the money that's going
to come via the patreon account that
we're going to be setting up very
shortly is going
to go to funding this kind of stuff the
videos but also to helping to fund the
the direct you know research and science
that makes this work possible so it's
very very much um some of you have asked
how have my own teaching infections how
you lived your life and your parenting
Wow
so I mean I've asked people if I if I
live authentically if I really do try to
practice what I preach to use a phrase
that I think is inappropriate to me
because I don't consider myself nor do I
don't want to take up the role of a
preacher that is not who or what I want
to be so I I really try to go ahead and
understand in my own life the issues
that people are facing and the skills
and virtues they need to cultivate
because of of some of the problems and
the deep difficulties that I've faced in
in my life and how how I conduct myself
in my personal relationships and trying
it is sorry the problem with this is
there's no way of doing this without
coming across with the false pretense
right of foe you know humility but
humility really matters right and not
being arrogant and and really trying to
own up to the mistakes I have made in my
life with people seriously make amends
and also seriously trying to scaffold
and encourage other people without
falling prey to egocentric narcissism or
arrogance and and the teachings have
helped me when I've succeeded and
they've corrected me when I failed and
so that's one of the most important ways
in which they make they make and
continue to make a deep impact on my
life so thank you for asking that when
I'm filming you know in front of
a class or just a camera I am in front
of just the people but the wonderful
team I have they come off in the credits
at the end of every video with Alan will
and Ryan and it's it's it's it's it's
intriguing and it was challenging for me
when I was first doing this because I'm
used to teaching in front of people and
I get responses back like people
laughing or at least smiling or nodding
and you know Alan and Will and Ryan are
doing their best to not make noise and
not distract me so they're very much you
know not usually responding and so
that's that's been really interesting
for me as trying to learn how to talk um
some of you have made some comments and
I you have to understand we've already
filmed 25 episodes because so I can't
make improvements about about some of
these I have made the improvement of
only using the black marker like some of
you said I will try not to say so much
we're going to talk about that later I
think you're now getting the sense that
there's an overarching large argument I
won't I'll try not to keep doing that
and I'll try not to keep saying right as
a filler word some of you said could you
stop doing that
I'll try and pay attention to that but
it's been very very interesting doing
this filming and and and and trying
instead to picture you guys out there
and what this might be meaning to you
and and and and and being respectful and
to try and getting you to focus on the
work so don't forget that there will be
50 episodes for those of you who have
just tuned in and so there's a large
overarching argument the first half is
the historical analysis and the second
half is the cognitive scientific
analysis I got a question here I refuse
I refuse but I'm sorry I refer to you as
a mystic when describing you does that
she'll fit well I have had very powerful
mystical experiences
my life I continue to have them and
along a line along the lines of you know
some very good research done for example
in the in the Griffis lab and elsewhere
work done on on transformative
experiences those have made a huge
difference and impact on my work I I
hope that I'm coming across as not just
a mystic in the sense of just relating
sort of a first-person account of
transformative processes I also want to
come across as a scientist who is
explaining how people can cultivate
these experiences and why they're
transformative and also I want to come
across as a practitioner that will
integrate my first-person perspective
all knowing of this the scientific
understanding with some good if you'll
allow me engineering of the psycho
technology so that other people may
learn how to generate these states and
also integrate them into a worldview and
existential framework that will afford
them being appropriately transformative
in in their lives do I have any thoughts
on how to make the pursuit of wisdom a
more widespread social project well
that's one of the reasons when I'm doing
the video series why I'm continually
giving podcast talks about wisdom I mean
what I would love to do what I would
love to do would be to start to set up
you know schools sort of I hope this is
is understood correctly secular
monasteries kinds of things because we
missed that we no longer have that
institution in our society where people
can go and learn both about the science
and the practice of these I should
mention that I'm also involved with a
business with
Peter kisara Anderson Todd and Leo
Ferraro there's a fear framework in
which we are trying to create workshops
on how to cultivate wisdom and and to
take this into the so-called real world
to make an impact on the the the broader
culture so I would like to create
networks of this and of course that is a
daunting task not only in terms of its
explicit project but putting in
tremendously effective I would need you
know safeguards so that this network of
secular monasteries did not fall into
any kind of abusive system and like I
said and coordinating that with the kind
of work we're doing with the Sofia
framework and creating the workshops
we're trying to also create a phone out
so there are many things I'm trying to
do to do this I'm trying to encourage
other people that I get to discourse
work with to talk more more often and
more frequently about wisdom its
relationship and difference from
knowledge its relationship to altered
states of consciousness its its
potential relationship to the meaning
crisis things like that some people are
asking through your experience do you
believe public schools can teach the
tools of a pasta in a non-theistic
manner yeah I think they could I think
if that non-theistic framework was
emphasized that would make it doable for
people in a way that was respectful I do
have one concern about this and I think
it's a concern that needs to be taken
seriously based on the work that Willie
B will be Britain and others right is we
don't have any good evidence there are
very much good work on the effect of
these practices on young children we
know that if you engage in these
practices they are transformative your
cognition and your culture sometimes the
transformations can be quite powerful
quite emotionally demain
and challenging for people they also are
altering there some there is increasing
evidence they're altering the wiring of
your brain so I hesitate about
introducing meditation especially the
past no to children before we have some
good science about so good science so
that we can do a proper and informed
cost risk analysis cost-benefit analysis
I should say or risk benefit analysis
that's what I'm trying to say we need to
do that in order to I think properly
decide if we should implement things
like the pasta in the public schools are
you planning on writing a book based on
your meeting crisis lecture as I've
mentioned I'm writing a series of books
there's already the zombie book working
with Christopher master Pietro on the
sequel to that that is the genealogy of
the meaning crisis which is called
unsheltered and then there will be two
books developing the response to this
the cognitive science and then the
overall response so that series is
coming out the second book in a series
should come out this year
there's also another book that as I've
mentioned earlier some of you who just
joined is going to be the cognitive
continuum from insight to enlightenment
sort of unpacking all of the cognitive
machinery that's involved in insight
flow sensibility transcendence awakening
enlightenment so that's definitely going
to happen
so unfortunately we're coming to the end
of our time and I want to again thank
Amara Rina for all their work always
thinking Alan and will and Ryan for all
of their tremendous work many of my
co-authors who I've mentioned like Leo
Ferraro and Christopher Massif Pietro
the ongoing support and friendship of
Anderson Todd and all of you guys for
this just tremendous enthusiasm I
promise you we are going to do this on a
regular basis there'll be another one of
these coming
fairly shortly and so I look forward
towards getting more of your questions
and doing this again I really really
enjoyed this now thank you very much and
I hope all of you have a very very good
evening