hello everyone the episode you're about
to see has held up our YouTube channel
for a while it was recorded remotely in
New York City along with two other
episodes and apparently it is a bit
blurry we couldn't control for it we
tried correcting it digitally but that
meant with only limited success there
was a question about whether to release
a still image over this audio but we
decided instead to release the blurred
product because in fact it is a visual
episode with artists London's eye we
hope we've made the right decision we
apologize for the blurriness and the
fact that it has held up the sequence of
releases but given that we've now
decided to bite the bullet we hope to
return to releasing episodes on a
regular basis on this channel we hope
you like it we think very highly of
London sigh and we hope to have him back
on the program hopefully with a little
bit better focus hello you found the
portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and I'm
here in Manhattan with artists London
psy a person I've been looking to meet
for quite some time and I just met him
yesterday for the first time London
welcome thank you so I have been eyeing
your artwork for years on the Internet
I've used it in talks and you are one of
the most important people that we've had
come on the portal even though very few
people know who you are or what you've
been up to can you say a little bit
about your background as a mathematical
artist of my background so my background
as an artist well I studied mathematics
an undergrad and maybe I should start
over so actually I went I went to
college and so you admit you went to
college I went to yeah I did and I
wanted to actually study French
literature and international relations
okay and my freshman year
I took the standard courses and I really
delved into 20th century French
literature and this was Duke this was
that tough so tough so okay so at Tufts
I took all these kind of liberal arts
classes humanities classes and I was
actually disappointed I had all these
ideas about like what what I wanted to
accomplish in literature and what I
would learn and I would ultimately find
some sort of meaning you know some
understanding of the world we live in
and instead I was frustrated and I
didn't seem to be able to get answers to
the questions I had and to my surprise I
was enjoying calculus much more than any
other classes I took dears so what
happened was that but in my sophomore
year I uh declared my math major okay so
you came out of the closet came out
closet yeah yourself as a proto
mathematician yes and then and then I
well of course I I grew up in a artistic
household and I I was thought I would I
would do some sort of art work but once
I discovered mathematics I found that
that it was is more artistic than any a
thing that I'd ever seen before it's
more creative is more ingenious is more
abstract just no author no no author
yeah and it's just it's just there and
it's and you could you could study it
and it was infinitely deep you could you
could pick up any part and you could
just keep going
and everything just fit together so
nicely I just wanted to see more and
understand more and you know all the
other mathematical writing that were
that was on the the blackboards like
from the graduate classes and things
like that I wanted to understand what
they were about and they must be
representatives of some sort of world
that I didn't have access to at the time
so I'm looking into your eyes I'm seeing
something that looks like a religious
convert or maybe like Ray Charles the
first time he tried heroin or something
you got the bug
absolutely okay yeah absolutely I uh I
mean it's the only thing I thought about
for about six years
I just you're obsessed I I just dived
into in fact I I don't think I had like
like kind of this really strong
mathematical ability I was just
fascinated by it and and for me it
didn't come as naturally as it did for
my brother and I really had to struggle
I really had to I felt it was it was a
real challenge to my self-worth I felt
like if I couldn't do this
I couldn't understand mathematics that
that life was just not worth living whoa
it was pretty it was like that I just
decided I would prove to myself that I
could do it and to the exclusion of
almost everything else this is this is I
mean I'm joking around a little bit
about heroin but it does behave like
that once you find out that there is a
hidden world and that the this hidden
world is strangely meaningful and that
it's clearly too beautiful to be
constructed by any human mind
mhm like the most beautiful human minds
can barely understand this world but
it's more like they're dusting off I
guess in my understanding I think about
like the ruins of Petra and imagine that
Petra were buried in sand and you were
just whisking away sand and uncovering
ruins you'd be pretty convinced that you
weren't authoring
the ruins of Petra you would know that
you didn't build this thing but you yeah
you know it's just such a privilege to
be able to touch something this
beautiful that's apparently unauthentic
aynd of my feeling I feel like of
reverence and transcendence yeah like
like there's this kind of eternal
stillness in this world mmm you know you
and recently I've just picked up feet by
old math texts and the idea is there are
just as fresh as they were you know
thirty years ago when I was studying
them and they still have that pure
beauty about them
look let me let you in a little bit on
why I'm having you on this program it's
not just because I'm so devoted to your
work it's also because my belief is that
we have the most beautiful symphonies in
the world locked inside of our journals
and our math libraries let's say as text
and you know you can ask well if you
have a symphony of Brahms is it a
symphony if it only resides in the sheet
music and is never performed that's a
very disturbing question because the
instructions for its performance are
present and it may be that a tiny number
of people can actually read a sheet of
sheet music and say oh my god that's
gorgeous because they can hear it in
their head but the rest of us actually
need the thing to be performed and yet
there is no orchestra or analog of an
orchestra that performs works of great
mathematical or physical beauty yep
that's true I mean part of my
interest in mathematics initially was
that I could take mathematics and the
beautiful images that I saw in my mind
yeah during math class and bring them
out as artistic things well so this is
where I start to also get a little bit
pissed off with you which is no I'm not
kidding yeah I'm angry about the fact
that we have these papers and books that
form the sheet music that's never
performed and then I find out that you
exist and that you have been performing
and recording effectively these master
works and then what do you do with like
the vinyl you put it under bubble wrap
in some loft in Soho in Manhattan and it
doesn't come out for years or decades at
a time so effectively you're sitting on
some of the only known recordings if you
will of some of the great master works
of the mathematical universe
WTF what are you doing man
I well I think I think with less what's
happened is that I'm always kind of
interested in the next idea or the next
the next theorem or the next project and
all these things that are made by me
just sort of you know after I'm done
with it it's not doesn't seem that
important anymore what I think that's
great in the artist but whoever's doing
your PR and marketing I'm firing they're
taking over so like here's the thing
that I get as somebody who studied
mathematics I had the same feeling I
wasn't necessarily made to do
mathematics that wasn't how my brain I
didn't find the symbolic layer very easy
but I I was exposed to things of such
beauty and depth that I couldn't find
any other analog on planet earth once
you understand how rich the mathematical
universe actually is
you can't believe that it was it was
somehow just created out of logical
necessity and there's a tiny portion of
it that is actually visualizable by our
visual cortex and what's odd is that
when we talk about things as being
visual in mathematics we're often
talking about things that we can't
actually see we have an intuition that
comes from one two and three dimensions
and then we have to take that intuition
where we can actually visualize
something we can construct a model of it
and we have a series of tricks by which
we use our minds to visualize things
that we can't actually see I mean I
don't even know what to call this
process I'm not sure if it has a
description yeah I know you mean it's um
it's definitely an intuition that you
have and it's some kind of vague mental
image and I what I have to do is I have
to somehow in my art work I have to take
this vague mental image and try to make
it concrete and it's it's not always
well this is the thing I now keep in
mind there are gonna be people who are
listening to this as audio and then we
will later release it as video and I
don't know how much of it will be
seeable on the channel but one of the
things that's very interesting to me is
that what happens in our minds when we
really start to open the portal to the
deepest secrets that the universe has to
offer is that we use this mixture and
the mixture is some amount of the world
that we can construct as models so that
we can actually directly visualize it as
if we could use our eyes to make a claim
model of let's say an algebraic variety
we're having and then there's this extra
intuition that we have to build in from
texts and from symbology to remind
ourselves that usually we're not able to
see the full totality of whatever it is
we're discussing and your art very often
has a geometric picture together with
prose that is kind of fading in and out
of perceptive
together with a bunch of mathematical
symbols that are describing what what
has been constructed and I thought that
what's very interesting is that that
actually mirrors what a mathematicians
model is of one of these higher
structures that can't be seen directly
but it's basically intuition from a low
dimensional thing that can be visualized
together with prose and mathematical
symbols that actually rigorously
describe the object and so that in some
sense it is a faithful recreation by
combining you know gorgeous form
together with text and prose and
symbology in order to recreate the
mathematical state that we mean by
saying well that's very that mathematics
is very visual so for example behind you
right now
there's an amazing painting that I've
seen for years I think I've actually
used in a talk at Columbia as the cover
art for the first slide of what I assume
is Heinz Hoffs
famous vibration from the early 1930s
and so it's the series of interlocking
partial tour I each of which is filled
up by circles and it's a very
impressionistic but also somewhat
rigorous description of this object that
on the Joe Rogan program I said maybe
the most important object in the
universe because when we talk about
physics being ultimately a theory of
waves we want to know well what are
those waves waves in what is the analog
of the ocean for an ocean wave inside of
physics so those waves are waves in
bundles and the bundles come in two
basic types for most most purposes one
is called a principal bundle which is
what you have behind you and you've been
so good as to put
action of another kind of bundle which
is sort of even closer to the wave
concept a vector bundle which is what is
behind me now I think it's very strange
that we have all of these programs let's
say on public television or you know
Brian Greene talking about the elegant
universe and all all of these things and
yet when I ask people well do you know
you're interested in wave particle
duality do you know what the waves are
waves in nobody seems to know about
bundles it's surprising
well it's disturbing and the idea is
that there are very few people depicting
bundles
artistically and essentially the only
person doing it is hiding their artwork
away so that nobody even knows it's
there J'Accuse well no I mean that like
this this is an important link I guess
is what I'm trying to say is is that you
are somehow breaking the secrecy it's
like you know Prometheus gave fire to
man okay well you are now bringing
bundles to the masses and I think it's
it's fantastic because it allows people
to skip the symbolic step which is
usually what what leaves them out of
participating at least as observers of
the amazing Museum of mathematical finds
can you talk a little bit about what
caused you to do these two works the
principal bundle behind you which what
do we call this hopf fibration yeah yeah
yeah called the hopf fibration and
behind me and I called it purple vector
bundle purple vector bundle all right so
we've got a principal bundle which is
the hopf fibration purple vector bundle
talk to me about what you were thinking
when you created them well like so I had
the fortune in undergrad to be the first
advisee of an entrepreneur she was an
assistant professor at the time her name
is Monserrat
ticky door and she's actually quite
known in not to break geometry
and she had this kind of deep kind of
quiet confidence about her and I would
go to office hours religiously and I was
sit there and annoy her with my
questions from undergrad math but she
was always working with with a little
pencil sharpened all the way to the
eraser almost and she would be always
writing the word that let F being a
fiber bundle and so I was a freshman and
I was thinking to myself what the heck
is a fiber bundle no one's ever told me
about that and so my kind of one one of
the goals in studying math was to figure
out just what it was that she was
thinking about he's what were these
fiber bundles that she was constantly
writing about and so in my mind I always
had this idea that I needed to
understand that and so that was kind of
probably the the germ of my interest in
bundles and then later on in grad school
I like you know encountered them and
then later on when I started painting I
just I don't know me we were talking
about intuition earlier and and I just
feel like there's some sort of sieve in
us when we see lots of mathematical
things or anything in a world in for
that matter there's something that tells
us well this there's some content here
and that this is worthy of our attention
and somehow these bundles vector bundles
fiber bundles principal fiber bundles
were just objects that to me were worthy
of sinking a lot of time and thought and
making artwork of so I don't really know
what it was that drew me to them except
that I was drawn to them and have you
ever read seeing yang of yang-mills
Theory Fame talking about his discovery
of the importance of fiber bundles I
think I have yeah it's a short essay
right he's written a few I think but he
talks about and I wish I had the exact
quote here
Einstein was questing for a structure to
unify physics in in Yang's estimation
the fiber bundle was the answer Tyne
Stein's quest hmm now of course this
cropped up in something called Kaluza
Klein Theory Einstein used what we would
now call you know the tangent bundle and
cotangent bundle of space-time so he
would he would hey let's just throw some
jargon out there so a fiber bundle is
sort of like the XY plane growing up and
going off to graduate school yeah and
the analog of the x-axis would be called
the base space and the y-axis and all
it's translates those vertical lines
would be called the fibers and the XY
plane would be called the total space
and in that story the x-axis gets
replaced by space-time and the y-axis
gets replaced by various things like a
16 dimensional vector bundle to give the
particles there 16 dimensions worth of
personalities there are these things
called spinners that are attached to
something that you can visualize as the
Philippine wine Glantz wineglass dance
the sometimes you call this the the the
principal bundle that governs all of
particle Theory the SU 3 cross su 2
cross u 1 bundle over space-time and
where each of those weird su-34 examples
of what we would call collection of
symmetries the form what mathematicians
term a group same thing with su 2 and u
1 is just a fancy name for the circle so
behind you what you see is a simplified
version of a principal bundle that we
might use for for doing physics research
but this one lives on top of a
two-dimensional sphere like the surface
of the earth and it adds an
extra circle for every point in space
and time and those are the lines as I
understand it that are in these partial
tour I that are nested behind you
so you're it's it's pretty tough going
but you're almost able to visualize the
structure on which electromagnetism
which is how you and I are looking at
each other through photon exchange
and the way in which you know the
magnetic like if these microphones have
magnetic membranes that are turning our
pressure waves into electrical impulses
all of that is described in some sense
by patterns attached to the circles on
that painting upgraded to make it a
story of space and time rather than just
a story of circles over a
two-dimensional surface of the globe
yeah so it'd be pretty crazy if it
wasn't like one of the coolest looking
objects something you know it is pretty
cool right that I mean the interesting
thing about in about painting it or
making it visual is that you actually
have to cut away parts to reveal what's
the actual structure because it's too
densely densely packed so I'm only
picking you know a select few of these
tore I am only showing like parts of
them so I can so I can actually reveal
what's what's what's underneath because
they're all nested now the odd thing is
is that before I knew about your work I
think and before I knew about I don't
know if you've been kind of drawer Barna
ton who came up with a picture of this
which he termed planet hop which I used
yeah yeah I think you pointed me yeah
now I did a version of this in a Python
release by a group called n thought and
I got them to help me out I had to use
the transparency of some of the visual
structures to allow me to see through so
I didn't have the occlusion phenomena
you don't have that luxury with pain
right it is very tough to see but the
fact that it can be seen and I think
this is the really interesting thing
means that a giant chunk of physics and
mathematics is almost within reach of
the person who can't trust her or his
ability to negotiate the world of
mathematical symbols and you know this
is a huge problem and a lot of people
think that they're bad at music in the
West because our music is so dependent
on notation however in lots of cultures
notation isn't what carries music it's
just personal instruction and a lot of
those people who are bad at symbols
would be good at music if it were in any
other culture that wasn't symbolically
so dependent and I view this as being
well what if I was in a culture in which
mathematics wasn't transmitted as much
symbolically fair unfair it's an
interesting approach
I'm not wholly sure but yeah I can maybe
I can buy that because one of the things
that that drew me to math was the
actually actuated symbols actually Wow I
want to talk about this mathematical art
movement that has never been named okay
right now I'm gonna try to figure out
what name to give it later but mmm like
tell me if any of the following of
impact did you John Archibald wheeler
who was fineman's teacher yep
very famous physicist he seemed to have
an incredible passion for doing the
kinds of things you're doing on
blackboards to give these masterful
lectures have you ever encountered his
blackboards now I have it okay let me
try another one Roger Penrose who wrote
the road to reality is of course a
relatively famous person drew the first
copy of the hopf fibration that I'd ever
seen strikingly like your own have you
seen that I have I have that book yeah
it's reality and I have some some of his
more recent books as well but
I think the first picture of hot version
I ever saw was Bill Thurston's in his
three dimensional geometry topology
oh the are these were these the
Princeton lecture notes that were
released as a book or do they hopefully
become a bit eventually peaking book
okay yeah this is the things that
mathematicians would trade these yeah I
heard mimeograph notes that weren't
quite books but we would all look at
them and we felt like we were looking
into secret tomes that only some people
could have that's right I think later it
became a book and that's when I went in
for science
so bill Thurston of course was famous
within mathematics as being a Fields
medalist who contributed to Grisha
Perlman's program for solving the
Pangkor a conjecture in dimension 3
proving that any sphere that was
sufficiently simple from its algebraic
properties had to actually be the
three-dimensional version of the sphere
did you know Bill Thurston at all I
didn't I knew people who yeah I knew a
little bit he came through Harvard when
I was a graduate student there and one
of it one of the odd comments he made he
said you want to know what keeps this
field great and I said tell me he said
in any other field if a fields medalist
came through that was that's like a
Nobel Prize winner at the top of the
field it would be a big deal and he said
Here I am sitting with a bunch of you
guys at some salad bar after my talk
because we're just not that pretentious
and I thought that's interesting because
he recognized that he would be a big
shot and he really valued the fact that
nothing was being made over his presence
beyond the mathematics that's a great
yeah in fact I was reading his book on
my honeymoon I brought it along Hinda
yeah we were just we were in Honolulu
and we had this nice place and a
beautiful lanai and here I was
reading Thurston's and that's when I
thought well you had but beauty for yes
I was what is it that you think you're
supposed to be doing I mean you have
this ability to understand mathematics
and you have the ability to look into
your own mind and see well how is it
registering and then you have the
ability to externalize it that's a
relatively unusual skill set I mean
there's I shouldn't continue mentioning
the remaining names like Fomenko is this
crazy mathematical artist I like the
fact that Beth Shiba Grossman is doing
some beautiful mathematical sculpture
guy named Nico Myers in I guess Temecula
is doing hopf fibration sculpture right
now Wow okay yeah well in part because
you know we're now talking about this on
these large programs and rather than
people just turning off and saying well
I don't know what that was because it's
visual people are getting super
intrigued and just going on and trying
to learn the math for themselves
including artists right so I think that
what there needs to be is this is a
movement I mentioned an artist named
Luke Jerram who did these beautiful
glass sculpture of pathogens and viruses
and like Milton he does malaria and HIV
and it's just absolutely stunningly
beautiful who are be obviously in MC
Escher is probably the biggest
mathematical artist of them all and
right why aren't there more people
working in this movement why isn't the
movement name why aren't you guys
collected why aren't there exhibitions
of this stuff why why why why why
I don't really know um it could be that
it could be that the people who feel
that they can actually do this
don't really have and maybe it's just
the mathematics is too attractive to
them you know it's like you'd rather do
math and then make paintings about math
or make representations of it you know
it's so much more beautiful to spend
your time like the analogy I have is of
a mountaineer you know you'd rather be
out climbing your mountains than have
been all right you know I remember you
okay tell me you don't feel cut off from
people who you can't show this to like
you've gone someplace on them on a trek
as a Mountaineer which is so
spectacularly gorgeous you can't even
believe that it exists yeah and you if
somebody you love who's not
knowledgeable and you know you're trying
to figure out well can I charter a
helicopter can I get this person to get
into really good physical shape and and
make the long trek is there any way I
can bring back a picture that can
communicate it I guess I feel cut off
from
[Music]
everyone in the planet who hasn't seen
that the stuff exists in Israel don't
you I do I mean as an artist as a
contemporary artist I'm often told not
to not to mention the math behind my
work I told you that I mean general
people just say oh they're not
interested in the math they're not all
right maybe you're not supposed to
mention it but I'm certainly it's I
think people when they see something
that there is mathematics behind it I
think it scares them off yeah and most
people have bad memories of their
mathematical upbringing or education
that they they have this reflex to just
turn away from it well it's like the bad
ex-boyfriend problem is that if you meet
somebody who's had a bad relationship
they're always gonna live through some
of that trauma in every subsequent
relationship and I think that we have to
recognize you know we talked about
iatrogenic harm as the harm done by
physicians to patients and we have to
talk about math a genic harm where there
is this like destruction of the love and
appreciation for the beauty of math that
is mediated by math teachers and men
mathematicians and math professors like
somehow we're keeping the beauty for
ourselves yeah and a large number of
people have no idea they've just been
like I know they've had their knuckles
rapped with a ruler and they're now in
some damaged state and you and I guess
when you look at this stuff some
percentage of people say I don't get it
it's not that interesting leaves me cold
and there's some other percentage of
people are gonna look at it and say I've
got to figure out what that was about
I didn't know that that was there yeah
are you connect
these people I mentioned um you mean the
people that are not like Bathsheba
Grossman oh no I'm not I'm gonna stole
no I know them I know how they are yeah
yeah yeah I think I think you and Andrew
had the clan bottles
during that interview oh yeah yeah yeah
different sorry i yang supporter yeah
yeah okay well so he's got these math
hats I would look yeah that sort of
coming yang yesterday I should get my my
hands and win yeah well what do you so
many to some extent this is actually not
the first generation of mathematical or
physical art in your family am i right
that your father somehow was uh was
mining this vein as well yeah so my
father trained as an engineer and worked
as a mechanical engineer for for ten
years quite successfully in New York
City and the whole time he wanted to be
an artist and he was painting at the Art
Students League and he made all these
paintings figurative and an abstract and
so on then he won a prize for painting
and then the stipulation for the price
was that he had to quit his engineering
career and devote himself to art and
upon quitting he found he couldn't paint
anymore Wow and he kind of did some
soul-searching travelled around the
world and that's when he realized that
there was something that he could do
with this engineering background somehow
he could bring engineering and science
into his artwork
and that's when he started developing
his cybernetic sculptures and and he
never turned back
you always made these kind of scientific
engineering just saw them yeah first
time you're at your studio yeah they're
gorgeous
mmm I mean I love your stuff I love
didn't know that I was gonna love his
yeah these gorgeous standing waves yeah
mmm and then by the use of clever use of
stroboscopic light he's able to freeze
them and show this like very subtle
motion that would otherwise be lost and
you know I think that the wave equation
which is a you know a particular class
of equations while known in mathematics
is one of the most beautiful things I've
ever seen
and to be able to visualize waves hmm is
precious to me astounding that I wasn't
aware of his work yeah
um I think the lesson from my father he
never thought of himself as as a
scientist or as a technological artist
he thought of himself just as an artist
and I think what he was trying to say
with that was that technology and
science they're they're not really like
tools or that you could just say oh
that's a technological artist that these
are just things that as artists that are
part of our culture and part of our
society that we have a right to use them
just as as much as in a professional
scientists do and I think in that way I
think of myself as an artist
not as a mathematic artist but as an
artist and it turns out that having seen
mathematics and having been exposed to
mathematics
it just it's just like part of humanity
that I've incorporated in myself and the
artwork that I make has those features
because it's kind of my life experience
so I'm not sure that we you could we can
term this movement as mathematical art
but I think we're just artists who are
kind of expanding our
our understanding to those realms that
are difficult for for most people to
reach and I think but that's part of
what it means to be human you know like
we don't call let me just just kill me
in your point mmm we don't call salvador
dali a mathematical artist and yet um
you know if he puts Jesus on a
four-dimensional polytope in the case of
a tesseract or hypercube we just accept
that he's mining some amount of
mathematics right as an inspiration for
his art um you know the development of
the use of linear perspective wasn't
viewed as mathematical art a lot of like
op art I mean if you think about
Vasarely I think that a lot of those
patterned structures that he depicted
that appear to be showing curvature by
using various optical tricks we don't
call that mathematical art necessarily
however you are going beyond that and so
I don't know whether it's exactly fair
to avoid the label I mean all I will try
to come up with a better one but you
know I I often look at my own soul for
lack of a better world word and I
realized that I may not be able to
believe in angels or religious origin
stories but I still have a place in my
consciousness or my heart or whatever
you want to call it that wants to be
connected with something larger than the
human experience I don't want to just
die on a random Rock and having it all
you know as Shakespeare said signifying
nothing
hmm
and one of the things that I actually
take spiritual solace from is that at a
minimum there is this world of
structures that would have passed by
completely unknown like the hopf
fibration which was only found in the
1930s so we have people who are alive
who are older than the knowledge that
the hopf fibration exists and the these
things are like angels we know that
they're there it's not speculative and
we know that we didn't create them and
we know that they seem to be
transcendent and I would just assume
fill my life with transcendent
structures that are beyond any kind of
human authorship and not call you know I
mean that the art here to me is your
decision to depict this in the way in
which you chose to depict it but the
source that you're mining has nothing to
do with our humanity I see yeah right
yeah I mean like in essence the thing
that you have behind you right now is to
me a modern picture of an angel where I
can't believe in angels but I can
believe in principle fiber bundles
generating the world of electromagnetic
activity which then grew up and not only
became Maxwell's equations became at
every kind of force other than gravity I
mean yeah
maybe math is not it's not a product of
humanity but I feel that the kind of the
struggle to understand math and to
create these mathematical texts I mean
that in itself is awesome that has a
very human aspect to it and that's one
of the properties I'm trying to express
in my art is just trying to express the
even maybe even though math is not a
human thing it's a you somehow much
deeper it's a universal thing but that
it's practice is human and that I want
to show the humaneness by that's what
you're doing yeah me you've got your
cousin humanized an angel right yeah
I want to bring that out of that yeah
it's very important that the the the
hand of the artist be present kind of
like expressing the difficulty that as a
human being I have to try to unknown I
see struggle that the you know I look at
all of the text that's going in and
around the color or in the charcoal
drawings and I struggle to read it it's
hard to read it because it's not
presented to be read in Anna stip achill
fashion and I love the fact that it is
slightly irregular and it shows in some
sense a perfect structure that cannot be
depicted perfectly right you know do you
ever feel like freaked out being in
direct touch with these otherworldly
structures
I feel inadequate yeah yeah that no
matter how much time I spend with them
there's a community never quite grasped
it in its totality it's somehow beyond
my reach and of course you know then
sometimes I blame oh well maybe that's
my ability I'm just not I just don't
have no I think we have to bear
away from how creepy it is that these
things are even there to be found
you know I typically give the example of
exceptional League groups or exotic
seven spheres which are the structures
people can look up if they if they dare
as things that both make me feel not
alone and make me feel vaguely terrified
you know it's like what if a
cigar-shaped object just started
hovering over the earth and it didn't do
anything like malignant but we knew it
wasn't from us
and we don't we didn't know what it was
didn't show any signs of life other than
the fact that it was there when I was a
child I used to have dreams like that
nightmares like that and this is long
before I knew anything about math I
would dream about these huge surfaces
and I was so tiny like the size of a
tent and they would be so smooth yeah
like infinitely smooth even though I had
no idea what infinity smooth meant but
they were so smooth and they were
terrifying and maybe that's kind of like
my very first kind of mathematical
experience just just these things that
appeared in my dreams now one of the
weird things that we're doing on this
podcast is we're picking on people who
don't necessarily know that we're coming
and promoting what they do and we call
this reverse sponsorship and the hope is
is that if we have a successful business
and we can pick on it that as we
generate interest in that business from
our audience that maybe some of those
businesses will come and sponsor the
portal and keep us on the air when we go
into very difficult topics I'm not going
to ever ask that of you but I I would I
do want to say that in some sense this
episode is part of something akin to
reverse sponsorship I think that the
biggest problem and you tell me if this
rings true or not is that a lot of us
work that never gets curated by a second
person that in general I used to think
curation was a parasitic behavior if you
couldn't create you could point at
things that were great and I later
realized with my own stuff then until
somebody else said hey this person is
saying something that you don't actually
get heard or processed because you can't
actually curate yourself somebody else
has to be the pointer and saying hey
people pay attention and I think it's
way past time that this be done for you
I know most mathematicians don't have
large audiences this is not a field any
physics has a few tiny number of
physicists who have large audiences but
I really believe that it's essential for
a curation process to happen with this
kind of work so that people can see more
of what is out there are you are you
open for business will you sell your
work or you I found you on the Internet
yeah sure yeah yeah okay so hopefully
supporters of the program can look for
London and his storefront on the
internet somewhere
what about exhibiting with other artists
and showing this kind of new wave of
whatever we want to call it other than
mathematical art right oh I'm open to
that oh yeah yeah absolutely
so you would do it you do like your show
yeah yeah of course are you up for like
suggestions I've been horrible to you
I've told you a bunch of things that
I've never seen depicted and asked you
to look in on it is that is that an
overbearing question no that's a good
that's a great well I did I did a series
of talks when I lived in Seattle and the
said yeah so I went to University of
Washington where I knew a couple
mathematicians and it was a series of
works I called demonstrations and
was kind of inspired by the Vinci's kind
of scientific drawings the most classy
Oni and so I invited you dub
mathematicians to supply me with
theorems yeah of theirs and I would
attempt to come up with my own
interpretation and so that was a cool
that was a fun project yeah and I I got
to know a few mathematicians that to
u-dub and but yeah that sort of
collaboration was was something I was
very interested in but 10 years ago and
what are you thinking about now what am
I thinking about now I'm always open to
new ideas and your list of topics is a
printout I carry with me every day so
I'm always literally on the subway yeah
yeah so a tear some day I tear singer
and he a singer in the next year yes
trying to grab my head around that I
think you had something of a curve Air
Cav air covariant very nice frog yes
yeah that's gorgeous stuff yeah and so I
yeah I look at it and and I have my I
have my mathematician friends and I have
a whole library of math textbooks that I
tried to consult so maybe if I'm correct
the vector bundle painting that is
behind me is masking another work that's
underneath it maybe we could take the
top painting off and take a look at what
you have there okay sure yeah
all right so London yeah you've just
unveiled this other structure uh-huh and
I'm looking at it and it's on its side
from what I normally expect so that we
can get into the shot that's right yeah
but what it looks to me like is that
you've taken the light-cone hmm on which
particles with no rest mass or waves
with no rest mass propagate inside of
the special theory of relativity
and then you sort of showed this an
algebraic how do you say algebraic
keygen generation mmm so it looks like
I'm looking at some mass shells yeah and
this diagram that should be familiar
from Einstein's famous annus mirabilis
of 1905 when he figured out special
relativity has been sort of augmented
with this extra structure of mass shells
and hyperboloids and what can you say
about what motivated you here well so I
painted a painting of some of my
favorite things from calculus 3 quadric
surfaces and I showed it to lowering -
and he said well that's very interesting
but can you tell me how they're related
and so that was the direct challenge
from Loring and so I thought about well
if I vary a certain parameter this was
what happened but as I went from one of
these types of services to the other
type from the hyperboloid of two sheets
to the hyperbola one sheet I had to go
through the cone and so I showed that
relation now that was basically the idea
behind that piece yes
[Music]
do you fall
and sort of any comparable source of
rich imagery from any other area other
than let's say mathematics and physics I
would say nature are you as fascinated
by it I'm not maybe I'm not as
fascinated by it but you know if I'm
walking on the beach and I pick up some
shells
no no it's unbelievably gorgeous but I
have to admit that nature weirdly though
it completely inspires me and I think no
less than it inspires other people I'm
weirdly slightly less inspired by
physical nature than I am by what we
might call mathematics I have to say I'm
the same although I am I'm a scuba diver
I'm a downhill skier yeah skiing is
pretty close to differential job yes it
is yeah I'm constantly thinking by the
curvature right terrain I'm on yeah what
are you fascinated by in scuba diving
scuba diving when I go on when I go down
I just see the strange sea creatures
residing on the ocean floor or you know
on the coral reefs and the shapes of
them any particular ones you're obsessed
with I can't say I'm obsessed about that
I just find them interesting yeah but I
thought maybe cuttlefish cuttlefish I
mean the skin of the cuttlefish is a
nearly mathematical phenomena if you've
ever watched them propagate these waves
through the chromatophores on the skin
when they're mesmerizing their prey
before they strike the patterns it's
sort of like Times Square with some
giant neon sign that's you know moving
through these pulses of light and I
guess I've never seen that diving okay
but
and in music what do you find yourself
most inspired by I like well when I work
in my studio I'm often listening to to
jazz usually Miles Davis Dave Brubeck or
you know Dave Brubeck obviously famous
for experimenting with funny time
signatures which is somewhat
mathematical yeah yeah I also listen to
a lot of classical music yeah so
favorite composer oh sorry
rakhmaninov really I never trust a
mathematician who doesn't say Bach first
I'll back this chair okay well no maybe
the ideas here your jam when it comes to
no I do love Brendan Burke and Joe yeah
yeah yeah I rock to that and are you at
all familiar with any of these attempts
to push math and reverence for math out
to the general public that are somewhat
off of the direct depiction I don't know
if you've ever seen my friend Edward
Frankel's a short film love and math
then he wrote a book no I I don't think
I've seen that but a slightly erotic art
film really okay no yeah and I guess you
know one of the things that I'm very
frustrated by is that it's just so
difficult to communicate it a
counterexample to this would be have you
ever been to the Exploratorium in San
Francisco yeah a long time ago then a
couple decades ago so Frank
Oppenheimer who is Robert Oppenheimer's
brother created this totally anomalous
Science Museum that was much more
effective so far as I could tell in
conveying the wonder of science in a way
that people actually got some kind of a
take home like it was viscerally
engaging and yet I didn't see that kind
of Science Museum duplicated anywhere
else yeah
that might that be a paradigm where
someone somewhere could do something
truly unique with the visual depiction
of geometry and topology let's say and
completely crack this open I mean like
to take the Promethean analogy all it
really takes is one of us to steal fire
effect mmm yeah that might work have you
been to the Google math museum and
Madison Square Park I've been to the
math user I didn't yeah is Google
sponsoring I got a sponsor that Google I
did maybe I'm wrong I didn't think was
okay I didn't know I just assumed it was
yeah I know there was someone inspiring
yeah but but yeah a lot of this stuff is
is sort of strangely slightly off
there's this beautiful limestone wall in
Stony Brook mass Stony Brook Long Island
that has some of the most beautiful
formulas in all of mathematics and some
pictures but it to me even that has like
errors and flaws and it doesn't fully
evoke what it is that it was trying to
depict I feel like we've failed well
yeah I feel that - I mean that's
partially why I don't think of my art as
a mathematical art because I don't want
it to be associated with this kind of
like oh bring math to the people that
kind of thing it has to be somehow
something I mean like the wonder of math
that we experience them yeah that that
is not I don't I don't feel that when I
could and look at these kind of displays
of mathematic art oh how interesting how
these things fit together right and
you're just like okay let me just you
know play with this a little bit and
then move on to this other exhibit and
here not what did you feel when you when
you look at Escher um I didn't well my
initial reaction when people were oh
you're a math major you should love
Asher I think that's great you know I
viewed the art in the math is somehow
straight
we separate and it was a great way of
getting a certain amount of math out
into the world yeah but I did and I
found him quite artistic I just didn't
feel that the art and the math were
always kind of hand in glove
yeah like well first of all like
symmetry groups of the plane I mean
that's that's cool but still there's it
it it doesn't capture the real depth of
math yeah there's there's so much more
to math than just kind of pretty
patterns or symmetrical patterns are you
obsessed with the physics not as much as
I as I wish to be yeah I think one of
the great mysteries for me has been why
is it the physical universe is such an
amazing client of the best mathematics
Frank right like you've done this with
substandard mathematics maybe just a
little bit of calculus and cement linear
algebra but it just goes way above and
beyond and actually uses our best stuff
our most beautiful stuff now I've always
thought that was quite odd that it
didn't have to be the way the biological
world does not seem to use mathematics
in the at a truly profound level there's
some cute stuff with like Fibonacci
sequences right and I would say that the
biological world mostly turned up its
nose at the mathematical offerings that
that were possible right very right I
guess I see physics and math is so like
intertwine intertwine well you know
there's this expression the map is not
the territory and I think that the weird
thing about physics is that physics may
be the one place in the real world in
which the map that is the math that
describes it may actually be the
territory that is mmm it would not
astound me if life really was about
vector bundles principal bundles and
wave equations that take place upon yeah
yeah yeah so we're gonna try to figure
out how to get you is part of an
exhibition so people can come and see
your work and they can find you on the
internet you have a
a site yeah so my site is just London's
high calm its TSA I mmm-hmm yeah okay
and first name improbably is love yes
hello and do n yeah and other than that
we're going to continue plugging your
work pointing people to your Instagram
page and trying to drum up some interest
so that you'll make more of this
gorgeous stuff for all of us well thank
you very much Eric London has been a
pleasure having you you've been through
the portal with London sigh look for him
on Instagram on Twitter and Morse most
importantly for at his website and
consider making a bid to keep me from
buying this art I think you'll find that
it's just gorgeous stuff look for us at
the portal on Apple on Spotify on
stitcher or wherever you listen to
podcasts please subscribe and go over to
YouTube and see if you can't subscribe
to us there and click the bell icon to
make sure that you're notified when our
next episode drops hopefully if you've
listened to this on audio you will go
over there and watch it on video so you
had a little bit of a taste of the great
stuff that London has been doing London
thanks very much thank you Eric alright
everybody be well
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]