[Music]
were the ones that were the Wanderers
between worlds right and we somehow
found each other but it's interesting
because the finding of each other seems
to be contributing to like a deeper
sense of wondering if we're like wonder
well I would like we're wondering
together right where there's a sense of
huh wandering and wander the two words
kind of sound the same right totally in
we're peers right it's like there's a
sense of like peers like there's that to
be a peer as to peer to stand together
in peer right you're deeply and there's
a way the way I feel more fearful when I
I get done with these conversations my
ability to peer into things and to
wonder and to to attend to things so the
we for me is I have all these kind of
people on some level that I walk around
with in my head hmm
they're like so these conversations open
up a door and it's not just like I'm
actually thinking about the person
having a dialogue with them it's more
like the dialogue as in the the the
question marks that these conversations
bring up that might my thought my
feelings and my observations and my
tracking of things hmm attract right you
know and and I wonder and add these open
questions that I sit with and ponder
about that have all been that's the we
all the people that have contributed to
that I think my whole life but it just
in a very concentrated way lately in
this last year what's yeah there's an
intensification of this process that
you're talking about I think yeah and
also in my life it feels like it's
taking over my so I can I could you know
I could look at myself in two ways I
could look at my job and you know and
the things I do and
and the thing I do for money or you know
whatever things I I do just to survive
in this world which is not always you
know simple right
yeah and then and then and then and then
this kind of passion in this interest
and all this stuff and all these people
which is taking over that like and and
I'm I want those two I want I want I
wanted to take over completely at in
some sense you know uh I want the whole
thing to just take over my life right
right you want to be fully possessed not
partially yeah yeah that's awesome yeah
like that possession is just you know
just can be completely you know
swallowed up by meaning instead of
wandering around in the zombie light
state doing things that are not fully
you know valuable ER yeah its own and
you're you're you just you've just
recently recently moved to Paris right
no I've been here for ages now actually
oh you have okay i I just read I just
recently moved outside of Paris I'm kind
of on the edge of Paris I'm in Avon
France which is next to Fontainebleau
which is I don't know do you know Gege
Jeff oh yeah III it's it's right next to
his his grave you know I moved down here
because I wanted to be next to turgor
Jeff's grave I mean that's over man that
reason you're right that's awesome
I like Jeff Christiansen like it
he maybe the more I understand girge if
he may be one of my he may be probably
one of my heroes I think yeah me too we
have that in common as well I guess
yeah yeah yeah yeah I know a DC's
influenced a lot of well it's a it's
arguable but you could say he's the he's
the the first inkling of the east to the
west facism into like exactly it like a
mystic could be somebody who's not a
mystic but somebody who's a walker of
this world to I think he was the first
person do even conceptualize it like
that yeah like the Fourth Way
seems to be like that's that's what
everybody's reaching towards on some
level Gurdjieff's 4/4 way I think and
somet in many ways he was the first one
to bring language to for this together
so I would imagine I can kind of almost
feel like if we're talking about I could
kind of feel his hand right underneath
underneath underneath that kind of made
that possible I mean I read some of the
stuff that he's in what people have said
about him for one it's like depending on
who's describing them it's a different
guru which is fascinating hmm right and
it's some of the stuff oh my god this is
really kind of out there and strange at
the content level but like but just this
notion of that that a person who works
and is in the world you can actually
transcend in in meaningful ways if that
wasn't even a consideration before like
it seems like he was a part of the
category right that allowed us to think
we could or couldn't right so I feel I
can't it's funny I haven't thought about
him a long time but like that's I can
kind of feel his hand underneath all of
this yeah all right I think you are you
moved right next to him
yes I had had to be next to him I had to
be I'm not a good chef Ian's
practitioner or anything like that but i
but i but also it's a very beautiful
place and it's on the edge of paris so
yes so it allows me to access to Paris
without having to live in the big city
right and there's a big forest all
around which is which is which is nice
for our family right so in the family
and I heard you I want to hear I want to
hear a little bit about your family and
like I heard you saying one of your
conversations something about um this is
the most adult I've ever been yeah well
I I think I didn't even grow up till I
was about 40 I think I just spent my
that my early life fooling around oh
yeah I was interested in two things
fooling around and spiritual practice
probably those two things
uh-huh but i but i but i never side it
took me a long time to settle so well
I've been I've been in uh sin and I'm in
a good relationship for some time right
now so that's that's not that true
anymore but that's really enough what's
that what makes it good well what is
what is the phrase you used in one of
your conversations with Jordan I think
it was secure attachment mm-hmm yeah
that's good yeah and that's that's
that's novel again that's like something
I wouldn't think that that could happen
to somebody like me yeah well I would
imagine it it's funny because you talked
about being a walker between worlds and
myself wanderer and I said I can't help
but think of Hermes right like Hermes is
you know the it Hermes is this kind of
unique God you know herb you nedick's
like like the you know the kind of God
of language which which is this
in-between world right so Hermes is
between like is not completely a god and
not not completely human but this this
between worlds but like it's home is the
place where they paradoxically come
together so language right so it's on
one level it's like language it's very
paradoxical obviously because it's like
the word isn't the thing that it
describes yet it makes the thing
available and it couldn't be without it
that whole home homelessness kind of
thing and I think I think it was I you
know I think it was Hillman pointed this
out I think it was Hillman where he
talked about it's interesting he talked
about that Hermes
I think mythically is wedded to Hestia
or one of the goddesses that is the
goddess of domesticity
right and he and he talked about like in
his clinical practice where how if home
if Hermes goes manic and like divorces
his wife you end up with these kind of
poo air yeah like you know boys you know
or Icarus going you know flying too
close to the Sun and then falling right
both but when Hermes is in right
relationship right this it's interesting
how like how this this this homelessness
right it's is wedded to domesticity and
so when you said truly yeah that means
very trying
yeah my life it also made me think of
you know the buddhist teacher ch√∂gyam
trungpa he talks about you know if you
become a Buddhist you take refuge in
being homeless so so there's this sort
of like was the sort of paradox is is
like is like okay you're not going to be
attached to some place but at the same
time you're making a commitment to
something yeah yes say that against it
so that kind of hit me being refuge -
how did you put that well you take
refuge is like a traditional Buddhist
thing right you take refuge in and you
take refuge in being homeless right and
not being attached to you know there's
different levels of it not attached to a
place but also not attached to an
identity or not attached to something at
the same time it's it's a strong
commitment so so I guess that's the did
that when I thought of the domesticity
and the let's say the wildness media
meeting and creating something that's
kind of alive
does that that makes sense totally well
I would imagine in some level you know
there's you know if I look if I watch
you for example like all of a sudden
kind of hearing I get this sense of like
oh yeah but maybe the right cuz I know
that
for me marriage and this whole thing had
secure attachment before yeah yours oh
well yeah I didn't even like until I had
it I was I started to experience it us
whoa what the hell is this right this is
what I used to what used to look like
prison to me feels like the deepest
freedom in the world right like you know
and one of those so it's so simple but
but I kind of got this sense of oh yeah
like the right thing goes in the center
of the mandala and then the whole
mandala yeah right and so I know yeah I
just kind of got that sense of just like
here you are like on some level one at
least my experience of you is your
things are gathering around you like
your channels right you're right there's
a stability in your presence at least
not lying and what I'm hearing you talk
about like there's a get you as a place
where you there's a some kind of
stability that some gathering or it's
coming yeah well I seem to have the
knack for meeting interesting people
that's for sure I think it's important
to be a student and to have you know on
some level right that's important I
think that's one of the things that's
missing in this culture is is that
people people who you know people don't
look for older people you know as models
models for them and I've always done
that so I've always I've always almost
met very powerful older older men
usually yeah huh and I've learned
learned that way what happens because in
my own family situation it was very
let's say I I spent most of my teenage
taught tied with met with my mother
right yeah you know and I and I kind of
experienced the feminine world very very
intensely as a younger person and I I
didn't I didn't relate to the
masculinity and the same time I guess
there was a search for for like cosmic
father figure on some level and
oh yeah totally so that there's a sipper
there's a way there's a way where I
would have met for one as I late to that
right I relate to that sense of what I
personally had people that have been
just really really deep and smart and
wise and multiple dimensions um
throughout my life that take me under
their wing and and and in some way one
of the things that they did is they
taught me how to learn I think right
like the only stories they'd relate to
me in some way that would have some
wisdom right and I they they on one
level I was learning everything that
they were teaching me but at another
level I think I was they were
simultaneously teaching me how to be
taught how to learn mm-hmm and I think
that's got really deep in me made me
think of you you mentioned Heidegger and
I remember there's a quote Heidegger
saying the bet that the best teacher is
the top learner like he's learning all
the time and people are just being
lifted up with him yeah so it's not that
he's teaching people he's he's learning
and then he's lifting up everybody right
totally
yes exactly letting learn I think he
said oh so being around somebody like
John Verve a key or or Alexander bard
or another guy who I know isn't nobody
knows him name track don't Kappa who I
study tantric Buddhism with is there's
there's this incredible there's
incredible demand at the same time
there's a kind of sweetness that goes
along with it it's
homes yeah there's a sweetness and I
think that's that sweetness so I was
just thinking about it you're like yeah
I'd somehow attract these really like
intensely almost intimidatingly wise
people right so I would imagine just
there's this kind of like there's a
there's a way that you probably listen
right and attend to those relationships
that draws out I would imagine like bard
for example probably just draws out all
this stuff that he loves to talk about
right like because there's something
about it's not it's like it's not just
it's not just him right there's you
speaking presupposes eliciting right
there's no speak you without listening
in fact if there is it becomes really
really war speech sure there's a kind of
that there's a a just imagine like that
like a like the respiration or of the
lung right there's a kind of like an
opening right that draws in and I and I
think I think about the people in my
life because it's really something to be
able to listen to somebody's story right
my to listen to a story in fact you
gonna listen to a story over and over
and over and over again like I think I
just exhausted my grandfather like all
the stories and I've listened to him my
dad like and I would just want to listen
to him over and over and over again
there and there's something about that
kind of dwelling with somebody in story
and inhabiting it that we want to be
part of a narrative we want to be part
of a grand narrative you know that's
what we're longing for us to be part of
this grand narrative right yeah yeah and
yeah and what do we love more than
anything else that's that stories I mean
that's what we love the most
mm-hmm I mean that's what's most
compelling to human beings is is
narrative isn't it mm-hmm yeah and
trying to situate ourselves with it
within that narrative and yeah yeah yeah
situating and and and then what just
bringing it back to the very thing that
we did that you brought up in the
beginning of being a walker of between
worlds mmm you know on some level that's
kind of I would say it would be is the
that's what we're doing constantly right
now we are the wanders right or the
Hermetic like you know at the edges of
the at the borders of things is we're
continually situating ourselves right
but the situating is is a verb right
it's like I think that we have to I
would imagine like for Becky what he
talks about is like you know at some
level he's really really it seems to me
that a lot of his work is he's really
trying to put the propositional in the
right to not get rid of the
propositional right now rid of the
definite certainty but but reveal reveal
the knowing upon which those certainties
arose out of so we can stand on them to
to to dive deeper in the mystery in
stick because he seems to be to me what
it seems like is he's like like look we
got a look at what's emerging we have to
look at the process and the
intelligibility of the process right and
not be blinded to it by our need for
certainty and all the all the stuff that
goes underneath that so there's a I
would say that that there is a
commonality of all the people that we've
been talking to that have this quality
of being a walker of two worlds and and
and and also our home in some way is
continually deepening a that which
situates right you know which seems to
be more or less of a period in more of a
question mark right I want to restore
the question yeah you know as as you
were talking you know I had about 15
different things coming through my head
like I was AI will be hard not you know
to know which which which question to
ask you because there was so much there
so I was thinking about your circling
and I was thinking and I was also
thinking about
dialo goes yeah and and I was I was
wondering what what John has has
contributed to your circling how are you
working with John what's what's what's
what's emerging in your relationship
mm-hmm oh yeah because he said something
like circling 2.0 and and uh you know I
wonder what that that is yeah
well I'm curious like deep so I I have a
sense of your sense of something yeah I
I don't I don't I I don't know a lot
about what circling is I'm just coming
at it from a point of view of intuition
what what it feels like what's your
intuition about it well my initial
intuition is like for your sense of it
endless psychological Ajay Singh
California style people talking and
getting nowhere and and that then I met
then I listened to you talking and and I
realized the way there was a lot more
than that and I think the fact that you
mentioned Heidegger probably probably
keep clued me into that there was there
was more going on with that well what
you talked about like what your like the
the the things that that the psychology
and all that stuff I have to say that
stuff is the stuff that drives me crazy
about what when people call that
circling I'm sure it's not so it's just
a bit just but that I don't think it
would be that right right no anything
about it it is that a lot like there's a
lot of people that have done circling
that are a number of generations out
from the people who taught them that
taught them it and the thing that
worries me right bugs be and I'm
inspired to shift right um is
is that strange sense and I don't think
anybody's like you know there's like
always like there's no bad actors or
like you know I think just people it
says something about the world that
we're in mm-hmm
but when people kind of come in already
with a set of psychological assumptions
and use these terms that are these kind
of psychological terms there have become
more about signaling a social in group
of some kind of some kind like mmm like
lots of words like trauma right or force
or or like talking about emotions and
shame in these in these or like
vulnerability or yeah I got really no
need in these kind of psychological sets
that presuppose that all those things
have a particular meaning yeah don't the
Dunkel on being questioned and so the
thinking is not happening right it's
it's like what Heidegger would say
thinking the thinking is not happening
it's just it's kind of yeah it's a kind
of salon activity yes yes yeah yeah so
it's like that so you're you're like
like the like that like the earth around
it is I think it's intelligent I think
it's really really intelligent because
there's something else available you
know which i think is where circling
their the circling for me and that
historically like how it started at my
grappling with it and the in the in in
the trenches with the people like as we
were discovering it it wasn't really the
essence of it wasn't about it had
nothing to do with even personal growth
the notion of personal growth it was a
about evoking a wonder right a in the
phenomenological that there's an that
that there is at all right like kind of
this sense of I think that's what we
were all
at the beach around the fire that as we
were circling what what were we doing
when we were doing all of that like the
spirit of it was is like what I kept
feeling like that fire kept circling
around that fire together and like going
through this and talking about our lives
would lead to these the presence of life
in the moment and then trying to
describe it and then realizing they
would go away in the description but
something would come come forward and
it's going away and then bringing
language to it and that sense of kind of
like philosophical intimacy right that
sense of right exoticness that
constantly eludes you but yet
constitutes you at the same time yeah so
that to me that's the heart of circling
right I think I can feel why you are so
influenced by Heidegger right and in
doing that when you're talking about
this this sort of getting underneath
concepts right getting underneath
everything and keeping it keeping it all
dynamic and alive without getting fixed
in some kind of right no keeping that
like as I think everything in Heidegger
should have moves towards poetry at some
level but poor time between people
absolutely absolutely
totally yeah so that so on one level I
think
because then I really heard you when you
said like keep everything alive it's
it's more like keep noticing how how the
how I how I don't recognize the
aliveness right it's like it's like it's
like revealing that everything's alive
right it's like there's a that there is
something alive and that there's
something about our time that seems to
take that aliveness and make it and
extract it water eyes make it you kill
it make it dead dead you know we're
walking around with corpses everywhere I
mean yeah and we're you know so it's
it's it's the zombie image right yeah so
there's and we have this inside of
ourselves where we slip into kind of a
dull state yeah we're not as alive as we
could be yeah and and there's a lot of
reasons for that one reason is it's just
that we're all so hyper socially
conscious and you know of our role and
our you know our job and you know how
can we be ourselves how can we flourish
as our you know well ourselves but how
can we just you know yeah we think that
the the actual work like I don't want to
I don't want to make it sound like just
being yourself being authentic is the
point it's it's it's more than that it's
it's a discipline and work as well it's
supposed to things I think about this
notion of authenticity right is is is
yeah if you think about it
psychologically it usually means
something like alright so thing inside
you know he matches the thing outside
when inside matches outside I'm being
authentic you know which is is it
usually can can turn into like like you
know I just keep revealing myself review
myself revealing myself right however I
think that's a on top gray authenticity
is something I think more primordial
than that I would imagine right I mean
more like it like it's right there's a
discipline to it right when I think
about you know authenticity like author
right it is it's more like if you're
well you're in touch with the muse on
some level it's not you yeah it's not
it's not your personality yeah wise not
even your it's not even your multiple
you're not even your you know Gert chef
says or something man is legion we have
all these millions of sub personnel is
it's not even those voices something
something coming from beyond right that
multiplicity I think and being being be
having a coherent tonality to it or yeah
make tonality a Co hate Co here you see
this is the thing about about I think
authenticity if we say authenticity is
something like on concealment and
inauthenticity is is is something like
concealment right there's something
about those two things right um so so
like authenticity I think primarily has
to do with a way of tending and
listening to what is most primordial
right and I think in our times it's like
listening to that which is most near
right that which is the horizon that
that I'm seeing with that I don't see
right that it and so on some level yeah
I think I'm some level in acting
authenticity is more like not just like
if I wanna so I want to like if I want
to like if I mr. bata in public public
or like right now it's famous Greek
philosopher I forget yeah totally that's
craziness you know that's of it but I
think it's more like taking up a role in
the culture ray and
and not just doing what I want but
really taking it on is like similar to
reading a text right it's like reading
the text so deeply right so like reading
all of it right so we're kind of trying
to read it like where the word if the
where you're waking up the dead author
because you feel you feel so right to
the point where you read it so fully but
at some point you turn the next chapter
and do you find yourself writing it
right in that sense of that sense of
authorship is well you have to be a
that's what I said about being a student
right that's probably the beginning part
when you're reading the book and you
keep reading the book and you keep
reading the book and keep it and all the
different you know nuances and shades
and colors of the book kind of you know
and until you're actually yeah you're
you are you're writing the book that's
yeah absolutely
you're you're you're you're you're the
one writing the book absolutely the book
of your life or whatever yes yes and so
I think it like it's for example in the
practice of circling and so one thing I
just want to say it's like I there's
there's a definitely circling there's
circling and then there's guys saying
stalks and they're definitely not the
same thing right in fact I think if
anything I've always I'm always the one
at the edges of everything kind of
listening to the whistle istening to
circling and listening to what what's
beyond and what's under it right so I'm
probably more disruptive to circling
then I think it's always just been my
proclivity the but I think one of the
things that when you learn how to circle
right it's very much that listening
that's really the thing you're
practicing it's the booby prize is
connection right the booby prize is
intimacy right huh but it's like it's
like what it takes to be intimate are
all of these deep things right and you
because if you just think about it if
you're I mean if you want to get closer
to the cosmos right if you want to if
you want to really know
about reality no you might as well look
in the most complex part of the universe
right which it seems to be the human
face and probably talk they probably
want to look at the part of the universe
that can actually talk well I was
thinking about when you were talking
about intimacy I was thinking about my
wife and I and our intimacy it's
thinking you can't really define and in
any kind of way and it's it's very
different than what you would imagine it
would be right it's very different like
if you're a young person and you're you
know looking for a partner or something
and you're you have all these needs and
you want this kind of person and and and
then you you you you know you meet this
kind of person and then you meet another
pretty that doesn't work out and you
meet another person and you kind of and
then then you discover intimacy yeah
that's that's that's it's completely
different right it's not it's not the
same thing as whatever it is you were
desiring or whatever it is you wanted
that you thought would fulfill you in
some kind of a way it's it's something
far deeper and and I don't I'm sorry
what you know - hmm it's almost a
wantable what it's unwanted oh yeah it's
like because to get it to experience
intimacy is to be transformed by it so
it's like if I say want intimacy yeah
it's almost gross or something isn't it
it's almost like yeah it's almost like
you're imposing on on on Hunt's on
something yeah that is right it's
already there or yeah
already the case like I would wear like
it seems like it's just yeah that
there's something primordial we
primordial II revealing about being our
being my existing that becomes in in and
through the intimacy it's it's and and I
think Jay people genuinely want intimacy
right but but there is phenomenological
quality of that when you actually get it
there's this experience of like oh my
god this is there's no way I could like
whenever I was thinking about it was
right it is way more than I could have
ever even have wanted or known to watch
and in order and through having it I am
now somebody that can I'm now somebody
different right that can actually Abbott
and that's the thing about it them to
see it's like it is very very man it's
like it's it creates it generate
constitutes ourselves right like those
moments if you think about I really
appreciated the way that you talked
about that like that yeah I think about
like what I was doing talking to my
friends over here maybe dating over here
and then I had this intimacy with my
wife and it's a completely different
universe yeah when I heard you say well
I was thinking about we the product we
tend to be interested in the product and
and it's not just it's not the process
that that we're looking for the intimacy
but it's you know it's just it's just
the living texture of mmm how would you
describe actually what when he when you
look at that contrast right as you said
how would you describe the experience of
yourself it with with your partner that
is surprising what is the phenomenology
of it like what does it look like feel
like how as it transformed you if it has
what is the tone us and as you recognize
it well it's love but love is it's such
a it's such a abused word right so I
don't want us I don't want to say that
even though that's what it is and it's
also
again although all of these words are
just are just words right so I the other
word that came to me is is divinity or
divine or you know I was listening a
Java vacant he was saying you know that
he was wanted to talk about the sacred
huh
and I was saying no it's not sacred it's
divine and in other words it's it's it's
just completely divine it's not sacred
sacred is something a little it's a
little bit outside right it's something
that you bow down to are you you it's
it's it has an aspirational quality yeah
but it but but intimacy in its ultimate
sense is fully divine isn't it I mean
yeah well what I think what I am
imagining when I hear the word divine I
get the sense of something behind what's
there and shining through it has this
quality of like mm-hmm encountering you
right it's a and yeah there's a divine
meeting it's like it situates it's
clearly greater than I am right yeah so
the main the between is is is is is is
is larger and deeper than the two
separate beings who are yeah and
whatever they're up to yeah
why would imagine it's kind of like I
just what strikes me is we're talking
about here's the so here's the dialogue
oh right like like it's just like it's
just like all of a sudden I'm starting
to something's coming to me that I
wasn't a whip I wasn't thinking about it
like that so you know you can kind of
fit I could kind of feel the like
there's that this relationship like and
then mmm kind of it going up leading to
this like sense of going ah something's
transcending because now I've never
quite thought of the divine or the
difference between the two in this way
but I think that you're right it's like
there is this sense of um
what I'm experiencing in this intimacy
with my wife does have this constant
experience of recognizing that I I could
I like I couldn't have wanted this like
I couldn't do I definitely couldn't have
earned it
I couldn't have even tried to earn it
because whatever it is is so present and
breaks through that's so beyond what I
did or it didn't do or all that kind of
stuff like it's such a it is such a and
it does it feels like it isn't coming
from me is it coming from her there is
there is the divine is the is the is the
relationship itself somehow it's
revealing itself to you yeah and it has
teen undressing reality if we could talk
about you know yeah
erotic yeah terms hmm it's hot it's
deeply humbling yeah also here that's
part of it like I get and it has a
demand to I think I think the demo the
divine has a demand to it on some level
right right but it yeah yeah I like what
like crazier when you look out like like
when you when you look out and you're
like like that where am I looking
there's no point in the room looking
care death
who's the graves kerchief you're just
yeah yeah yeah gear Jeff is like my
getting out there but when since we've
been talking about intimacy and I've
been liking it feel the presence of your
relationship and your life like that
when you look out it's like the gaze is
like more like it's less it's less
peering and it's more like that you're
looking out by you're looking in at the
same time right you like the double the
the Zen arrow at the points outwards and
inwards at the same time yeah yeah yeah
absolutely
uh-huh nice to meet you my friend you
too yeah yeah well I think it's like is
it fair to say that like there's
something about um that things are upped
in the space between us right like
things image like that it seems so in
something grabbing that there something
about the the conversation seems you
evoke those things and you're finding
yourself they become really salient yeah
exactly yeah yeah and the propositional
stuff seems back rounded yeah yeah no no
that's the sense I'm getting is just
like my only intention was I was I was
I'd like listen to podcasts and stuff
like that I would go like oh my god
there's so much more possible in these
conversations with these people I'm like
Jesus like it was so much like so many
things that were missed and they were
giant kind of driving me nuts and I
thought it was like somebody said guy
you ought to do a podcast you can get a
good interviewer that's like okay so
that's sort of thinking about it I was
like okay well maybe I can justify doing
it I'll maybe this is a good way to to
get to kind of get the word out so to
speak and I was thinking like it'd be
kind of interesting just to try to have
a conversation where it was like it was
a sweet spot between like you could say
like a normal conversation or interview
and and something like circling like
what would be the sign not too weird
where people are like what the hell is
that right and it's so it's really
it hits that sweet spot and yeah well I
don't like I was talking to Bonita
Bonita Roy recently a very interesting
person and the first thing I said is I
don't want to be formal I don't want to
be marketing I don't I don't I don't
want any spirit of marketing to to
infect a conversation with somebody i I
want to throw this whole you know game
sort of you know overboard right to the
right to the essential yeah right
totally so like you don't need any
effects you don't need it I got a little
bit of music at the beginning of the
podcast but I make it very short and III
don't need production I don't need any
of these things I guess I get a bench
eventually perhaps if if this takes off
maybe I'll have to think more about
those things but the raw the raw stuff
is always more interesting yeah it's
like if we think about the raw stuff and
you're making a distinction between like
like oh yeah I don't want to do this one
thing yeah and I do want to do this
other thing
yeah this other thing I don't quite know
what it is but this marketing I'm
imagining is something like I don't want
to I don't want to like frame and and
then tell you that I don't want to it's
that I'm incapable of it of it you know
the question comes up for me and that is
what are you it what are you an
allegiance to or that maybe it was the
way when you looked at it he that which
you're an allegiance to is the thing
that you can't not be right you can't
not break and what are you even
allegiance to they just kind of I think
this is maybe related to that question
about the divine double right yeah I'm
an allegiance to the divine double yeah
indeed I would have to be because it
would be too painful not to be
it's not because I'm not be cover
because I have some kind of it's not
because I'm particularly okay authentic
or you know I would I would I play music
and it was always improvisation and I
could never play the same song the same
way because it would be boring right
yeah it's it's not it's it's it's
problematic in certain situations in the
world but it's but it's in other ways
it's an advantage right mm-hmm yeah yeah
and I'm I mean you've obviously been
able to turn that into something that
that gives you a unique place yeah yeah
I feel very fortunate very very very
fortunate about that like because
instant in so many ways I I really rely
I'm relating first of all I relate to
the clumsiness and the what like they're
always ahead of yourself on some level
like you're always oriented to the thing
that you can't quite say right so you
end up kind of losing mid-sentence and
then nobody's understanding you but like
that thing's still glowing and there's a
in betweenness that is doesn't lend
itself to finished coordinated and
products like marketing right like
marketing is something like you go
through all that stuff so that you can
present something to have a particular
effect it's more of a transactional
right I'm saying this so that we get
there
so well I worked in marketing a little
bit now as I was the idea I was the I
was good at concept generation like I
could think I was gonna you know coming
up with cool ideas yeah but but I was I
was definitely the back-office guy I
wasn't I wasn't the guy out knocking on
doors trying to try to sell the product
yeah totally
yeah so you can totally get it you're
the back you're the bad guy you're the
one that like is oriented towards the
chaos uh-huh yeah so I would think so
there's something about like like for
for for me I feel in Legion
- that - that thing that I doesn't quite
have a word yet for it right like I mean
one of the things I've liked I've really
liked about the practicing circling for
like the last 20 years if I think about
like the machinery it exercises is
listening to people like listening to
people like for just listening to them
and what listening is is so much more
than just being quiet and paying
attention right it's it doing that over
and over and over again I feel like I
feel more oriented to I think the
revealing of that which I continually
find myself an allegiance in which is
something like that more nests or the
it's like that sense of the
inexhaustible intelligibility that
behind things that that's the body so
it's just like whatever it is just just
just having having your compass set to
that right it's just gonna is just a it
just seems like if you just orient that
way of like okay I really want to like I
want to get you at the deepest level I
want to understand why you exist and how
you exist and and those things have you
go very very deep and like concrete and
right here right now but they
simultaneously like have all of these
deep primordial transcendental
contextual disclosures of the holes
right I mean that's what a human being
is in the moment what the hell else is
it but like an awkward coming together
of of infinity and finitude it's like
that's the human face
that's probably why when somebody walks
into a room we're like it changes the
whole moment right like if like it or
let's say afterwards you know that
you're gonna go to a shooting right
after this podcast this would be a
completely different moment right go to
a shooting what do you mean like
somebody like yeah he's like somebody
you're gonna go watch somebody get shots
or like or you're gonna go meet your
mother or you're gonna win a million
dollars yeah like in some way what's
constituting this moment are these are
these these this recognition of one time
right temper ality but also this sense
of like when were when we're in the
presence of another human being it's not
just like another object it's a
completely it changes the texture of the
meaning of the moment right if you know
them if you don't know them it's a cut
it's like hmm so so you're looking at
pure meaning when you're looking at
another human being and if then you can
look at what what is meaning so looks
like everything is one of the things
like when I really got this when I was
in art school I can't I moved to San
Francisco to go to go to the steps of
score Institute the sculptor in a
painter yeah yeah we had this like I had
this life it's amazing teacher this life
drawing teacher right where we would you
know we would like constantly draw you
know they'd have like nude models and
stuff like that so we were constantly
drawing nude models and and to hear him
talk about it's really fun when he would
do his critiques because to hear him
talk about like what it was to render a
human being he's he would say that you
know it's weird you can get away with
like drawing an animal you know in a way
that you can't get away with in drawing
a human being and he says because every
single part of the human being is
dynamic and expressive and I think what
I've come to understand that is that
there's not one inch of the figure that
doesn't communicate a world mmm right
there's not one part of it that doesn't
express right a whole culture a whole
world a whole lifetime a whole future
ever so if you if you render it either
realistically or abstractly in a way
that like if any part of it doesn't
speak or say it's it somehow doesn't
really show its humanity it doesn't show
its figurative this mmm and I just I
wanted that maybe think of us that when
you try to create the whole of a person
if you are sketching them or drawing
them you could only do that if it was
incomplete like the human being is
incomplete right whereas the animal
would be complete already right as if
you're drawing a human being you're
drawing something incomplete right yes
yes it's like you're drawing a being
that every part of its being is given by
what it isn't right an anticipation of
its own death and all the horizons that
that ultimately s'en animates as
meaningful and apparent like we are that
which we're facing right no and that is
a that is what we're looking at when
we're looking at a human being but then
if you say that
you're talking about we're looking at
all-time we're looking up we're looking
at like the one horizon you'll never
reach your that right and everything
that lights up so if you if you just
start talking about one part of your
life right if you just take that thread
and you follow it all the way down
you're gonna just gonna you're gonna
keep it up find yourself at the weave of
the whole universe no matter what it is
it's just and there's something about
for me when learning that and just
having that orientation and listening in
that way that has just really weaved me
you be into a into a into a person that
just feels better about being alive yeah
it makes the world so much more
interesting I see yeah yeah I wonder I'm
a musician I'm music is more my world
than the visual world so I wonder I
wonder the differences and when they're
the differences between a mmm a visual
sense of like like you're talking about
drawing a person I don't know if I could
ever relate to that particularly I don't
know if I see with my eyes so much but
what do you think like what what do you
what are you hearing about like what I'm
saying like if you were to Reese say
what I just said or what you heard how
would you put it
oh I was just I was just you're bringing
me into your appreciation for the the
depth of a human being or something like
that yeah totally so just I'm just
curious like so when in just answering
that question what was that like well
what was in answering that last question
is like we were like whoa how would you
say it like what what are you hearing
when he went at that question where did
that bring you when I was answering that
question I guess I was I didn't want to
get the wrong answer I didn't want I
didn't want to say something superficial
or trite I wanted I wanted it to be the
right answer
yeah totally so there was a sense of
like oh yeah there is something there
that could be more on yeah right so you
had a sense of like that there was
something that you heard and that it
wasn't everything it was something
mm-hmm yeah
yeah I have a feeling see I think I
think one of the things in terms of one
of the things I've just I've been been
finding myself went was like I was gonna
say it's like when I started doing these
conversations online that was my only
goal was just kind of like well let's
let's see if we could just do a normal
conversation and and and something like
circling and just find the sweet spot
right so I wanted to see I could do that
and what I found out is that like I
didn't try to do anything I just ended
up engaging in the conversation and
through that I actually discovered that
that's what I do all the time like in
most of my conversations and and and
that's I could feel like the the all the
circling I've done through the years and
and how much it's contributed to me and
I've given it to it in this this an
agogic relationship I've had with all
the people involved mm-hmm Mike it's
funny I could see all that come out in
this new context but with people that
have these intense models right like
John for baekje and you know you know
who else said sure that Jordan Peterson
George Hall Jordan Osher really you saw
he's like all these bit like um
Christopher all these people who have
this very studied yeah background right
and then engaging in these conversations
and and me thinking that this these that
they have these kinds of conversations
all the time and then going like whoa
this was all of know maybe they don't
have those kind of conversations over
academics and you're bringing you're
bringing a sort of yeah it's like it's
like a I guess the image I have is
something like an African drummer to try
to speak to a you know classical
composer or something like that
yeah and totally yeah it's like they're
in it's it's it's been mutually
affording right it's mutually a very
anagogical where this back and forth
like what I'm at right because maybe you
you you you have been working in this
sort of world where you're trying to I'm
looking for a phrase which which which
Bonita was talking about she was talking
about education and she was talking
about how we have we don't train the
let's say effective self yeah or the
sensual self or the self that is that is
the sensual self I guess is the best way
we could say we don't really train that
in educated education right and so then
she she says that people get to their
50s or something like that and they
realize that they haven't trained that
part of them and that's that's probably
you've been training that part of
yourself you've been your effective
emotional you know artistic life and
those guys have been training their
their intellectual training and refining
their intellectual life yeah more
probably and bit less the the the
effective life so so that it probably
attracted to you for for your ability to
bring them there and you're attracted to
them for their ability to refine your
your sort of wildness into something
more coherent that could be expressed
yeah absolutely absolutely and I just in
its bit it's been interesting to watch
so I you asked me like what have I
gotten out of these conversations in
Reiki and I would say with for baekje
and with Chris and with all like all
these people right that I've been
talking but I've been getting tons out
of it man I've been like
in its one it's just deeply encouraging
sure like like I feel just deeply
encouraged me to you I just feel deeply
encouraged in the in the thing that just
called you forward like that thing that
spoke right like it's animated whatever
that is I feel that too I had a chat
with Kristoff master a Pietro and it
started with a letter conversation and
he had this way of writing and I was
like wow I saw I thought I was talking
to Herman Melville or or or Henry James
or or Edgar Allen Poe or something it
was like wow nobody writes like that
anymore nobody writes to that kind of
elaboration or I kind of poetic
elaboration it's almost like I was
talking to a person from the 19th
century and and then we had a
conversation and I just I felt like okay
you know this is I feel at home here in
a way I don't with with most people I I
here's a human being I feel like I'm
enriched in his presence and in this
discussion and and that's where I want
to be all the time you know I want to be
in that kind of enriched I want to have
that enriched feeling when I'm speaking
to people you know all the time
otherwise I mean I don't want to put
down the you know just the the
modalities of life but yeah there's
something so it's like you made a
contrast yeah I like I like what I like
what's being bored in this conversation
here like it there's a I like what
you're preg made in the conversation
with right so like now Chris is here
yeah in a certain sense err or or your
experience of Chris in what so Chris I
mean like Chris is something else like
Chris is just he is he is I whatever
whenever I've watched anybody talk about
Chris they always pause and they're like
yeah there's like just that they go he
is poetry right
yeah he's a poet on some level like and
so that that's easily it's rare to meet
a poet I would say and I would say
especially now because people don't care
about poetry you know and most poetry
has just swallowed up by it by the
Machine right right by that by the
endless discussions and yes there's a
way where he just dwells there like the
way man the way that language loves him
right and it habit is just so when it
cuz when he talks he just gathers like
he he you can literally watch him speak
and you he's he has a wrestling match
that somehow comes out like you get the
woven tapestry of a wrestling match or
just something like where he's like yeah
it's it's like the idea bucks of
intelligibility and he weaves these two
things of like the deft hand and right
that which be holds is that which was
beholden and he just there's this world
coming on and there's a way which I
Gurley get with him there's a ton
there's it and he's so young at the same
time which is so odd yeah odd to talk to
somebody who's thirty years old who has
that kind of ability to speak I guess
just speak words you know in that
feelings you did you notice that feel
like for me it's like I there's a it's
almost like in a way that would as we're
talking with hit up talking about Chris
there's a way in which I feel we've just
evoke to spirit of some kind I feel like
a context in his in a in a room of some
kind or a different space and just a
bulking his name and I would say that
like
but I think what I feel it evoked by
right and invoked into it is I would
imagine would be something like that
whatever it is that calls Chris into
being like I'm wondering about that's
another thing about the text I'm still
trying to get this notion of the divine
double right yeah like one of your
questions was what is your divine double
ask like man it just seems like whatever
if I could answer that question it
probably isn't it probably isn't it
there's this this mmm
the thing that's beyond the horizon
right I thought of the quote by Rilke
you know he says every angel is
terrifying
yeah nuts that's right divine double and
so when some yes which can't be defined
and it also destroys us in that in some
sense and it does a currently disdains
to annihilate it strains to annihilate
us exactly yeah oka is pretty so there's
like there's something about I think
this is this is part of the thing about
Chris is what do you folks and me and it
sounds like very something very similar
for you is is he he evokes whatever it
is that calls him to language it's like
it but it goes beyond Chris right
there's this quality of that there is
something really transcendent in just a
voguing his name he's transparent to
something hmm
that his language calls in and comes
from mom I so I just end up really just
like I really like him I just really
like that guy a lot he's such a such a
well I guess that's the thing there's
likable is allowing yourself to be open
to that transparency yeah which makes
somebody it makes you feel like you're
talking to somebody who's not a persona
who's not a mask who's not a it was not
mechanical in this his way of being
somebody who's like he was like I guess
opened up to that
Oh on some level yeah me almost and I
think to share in the way that he does I
think one of the things maybe that gets
communicated for me in that sharing is
there something Trent yeah there is a
quality when he speaks so lyrically and
poetically and espouses in this way and
how it is like rolls off of him that
there is there is a way in which he
because he talks about Simba symbolism a
lot about you know in the way the
Tillich does um where a symbol is
transparent you look through a simple
right it's like the symbols like speaks
to what's beyond itself in some ways
embodies it but beyond it so you
actually live a symbol you enact a
simple right and as well it's complex
it's not opaque and so when you imagine
like like Chris is speaking symbology
right but he's pointing to whatever
symbol it is that would speak symbology
at the same time and there's this
reverent saying that that his feels
fills you up and I've noticed that with
Kristen with people like Chris hmm
that there's something evocative yeah
he's evocative that's interesting yeah
word you Bob I know I am non contrasting
him to other people who have another
kind of quality which might be more
fierce or more like extreme clarity you
know Jordan Hawes is extreme clarity
about them it's almost fierce what are
we doing what is this thing this quarter
of the internet like these conversations
that are gathering around in which you
seem to be one of the places that a lot
of its gathering together right and so
there's a way in which kind of talking
about these people in a way is is in
some level is talking about on the space
I live inside of great and being that
you could say the
finding our homes in that which is
homeless inherently constantly situating
ourselves right but kind of attracted
our home is in the question mark right
so that there's a there's always a way
in which I feel I feel a kinship with
you in the in the finding constantly
finding home right constantly finding it
so so talking about this notice that I
talked about Chris one is I'm in at
Verve a key and there's a way these
people just deeply impacted me right and
contributed to me mm-hmm
I can kind of feel moved you know ISM my
heart open is I'm just talking about him
like yeah like and it's so good like
it's such a good way like like just they
why feel the sense of like when I talk
with them like they just what they want
is good what they're looking at is good
what we're peering together out at is
good and and did I just don't like it's
just so clearly expense I think it's
good faith that emanates from that for
those people you know completely right
good good faith there's there never a
feeling of one of somebody you know
gaming with you or playing some kind of
a right you know right
sleazy game of some kind it's just it's
just just good faith right it's like you
know when all the marketing is gone and
then maybe that's what we really want is
to communicate with each other in good
faith yeah yeah totally totally yeah and
I think I find myself as we're talking
it's a great word good faith
well I yeah I find like I find myself
having faith in it
and then as talked about it it's not
like I'm it's not like I'm present
necessarily to having faith I live in it
and so as we talked about and I see it
I'm like oh yeah I bet on some level
what I'm talking about is like something
about the the authenticity of these
dialogues and what what we're all up to
and how much I would have faith that
there is that I was like so I guess
sincerity is very powerful isn't it yeah
you know sincerity is almost something
that the cuts through all that
which which but it's even more than that
it's it's it's I guess I'm coming back
to it's just revealing what's true more
and more revelation more and more
consciousness I guess are more and more
like just even if it's just a little bit
it's it's it's it's making making the
world alive again I guess yes as we're
walking through the this field of
corpses you know yes totally and it's
and it's doing it in such a way that
it's actually okay here vocally like a
Vulcan Heidegger right the and the
Greeks and the pre-socratics right which
is this kind of notion the original
notion of truth which yeah yeah look
I've heard it enough said I probably
pronounced it wrong cuz I just haven't
heard people say Alethea okay yeah right
all right just to give some context for
that I my understanding is so so that
ley Thea was a river or sometimes it's
also portrayed as a lake in green
pathology right in the river or a lake
of forgetfulness which is really
interesting when you think about this
because I realized I didn't really quite
croc Alethea for years and I thought I
did which is very Alethea in this way
but so it's like it'd be something like
if you were to if if you're walking
along with guys walking along any trips
and falls and he falls in and lay
Alethea mm-hmm it's not like people are
like wake up in the morning and they
don't find guy but they're like where's
guy no he's completely forgotten it's
it's it it's it's missing the guy's
missing right like it's it's it's
missing that he's missing so it's not
even it doesn't it's completely
concealed so if you think about ah lay
the√°-- the truth is concealed you mean
yeah yeah and well the truth is when it
goes Alethea so it's the the AH
is the event right that's the first time
right of that which is veiled or
concealed is the moment that it's
concealed it's concealed this becomes
unconcealed uh-huh so that's so right
there that was a little bit
AHA yeah oh oh oh that's right that you
could say that that is a local
manifestation of things reveal ah in
it's interesting is it
it isn't cognitive necessarily know the
bottom up right whose bottom up that
experience of revelation right that's
what's drawing us back for for the taste
of life there each time yeah mmm so
there's this quality for me and I
thought for years I always thought that
was that what what the truth was was
what was revealed right the Alethea like
it's not on what though I get it it's
like what yeah there's like the work yes
the the what is something like the
proposition right it's something like
that so it's not like oh I just found
the Holy Grail here's the Holy Grail all
right
more like you you found something that
something that is unfolding into
something else and yeah it's process it
sort of endless process yes and I think
what unfolds
because of what I think that what what
Heidegger was was reeling was
remembering and going back and in into
the the notion of truth and Alethea I
think what he was pointing out was
something that that got lost and I which
is what Heidegger I think kind of does
and that's what's so cool about reading
him is that you walk back into these
places and it's a complete to do that
even if you don't understand what the
hell he's talking about just the attempt
to as you do these acrobats that are
fists like my to be deeply deeply
evoking and transformative almost yeah
and Alethea I started to realize that I
don't think it's it's about what's
revealed
I think what's actually the real thing
that got unconcealed is concealment
itself is the is the revelation of that
being right for being to be disclosed is
it is it reveals that it was disclosed
that its nature is concealment that when
it reveals itself what it reveals is
that there is concealment and that being
is that thing which you can never become
completely CLE clear about the vision
itself health quality hey maybe being is
the last concealment yeah yes and like
in revealing it right it it reveals and
in a certain sense conceals its
revealing right kind of like light like
light lights of everything but yet it it
withdrawals in its disclosure right so
it's like and win it withdrawals it does
something that animates everything that
we are and the thing about it so so like
like a good example of this would be see
it's funny it's like you can like these
are the things that I I eat
this is kind of very ilithyia Nazz I'm
talking about it because I've been
talking but I've been grappling with
ilithyia my whole life but I don't have
this experience of like if that's
because it's a genuine idea isn't it
it's a genuine idea because there's no
there's no end to what it can reveal
about itself yeah exactly
so to just sort of get close to it it's
like it is intimate like I'm like I I
probably said this over and over again
but what has me say it is that I feel
like the more the closer I get to it the
more withdrawals and reveals at the same
time it's very much pregnant with what
it is but it's it's interesting I think
the movie that exemplifies this is is
the is the movie The Sixth Sense
remember that movie with the Bruce
Willis yeah it wasn't he wasn't he was
dead yeah I see what you mean yeah yeah
he was dead the whole time right and so
you're watching the movie and he's dead
and he doesn't know it right
yeah and in none of the audience knows
it either so we're all like it's all
kind of weird something's kind of
strange or something there anything in
the movie I don't remember exactly what
happens but somehow like out of the
corner of his eye he kind of starts to
get and then as he gets the whole
audience gets if there's this moment of
Alethea it starts to become revealed
he's dead and like and as it's revealed
he can kind of feel it go through the
movie theater write this revelation he's
like oh my god him I'm dead and then
like a moment later once that
recognition the revealing comes in then
it goes back to the very beginning of
the movie and if it flashes these like
the main frames of everything that you
just had watched and you can you can you
see that it was obvious the whole time
yeah right hmm there's something about
that like that revelation of concealment
in it's obvious 'no sin its nearness
right so i think i think one of the good
faith
like wonder what we what we're doing
what draws on this good faith in these
conversations right is that there's a
there's a thick we're all oriented
towards truth but in this Alethea sense
that that that that there's a kind of
implicit understanding or quality that
we embody right in our search which is
the sense of like that there's something
that were it's not like we're trying to
dominate or get clear about something
it's more like looking and loving truth
and to look for truth is to look towards
concealment right so to be oriented
towards that which is is yet unveiled I
mean I think I think that's why a lot of
the conversation is about the times that
we live in and as I think as Heidegger
would say is is is is that the time that
we're living the techno framing age of
technology that were in is this not
technological devices and it's not
technology itself it's the UH the way of
understanding everything at everything
that's anything at all by virtue of
which we understand it as a kind of
standing in reserved fully available
right you optimized to be extracted to
be ordered to function the death that
you're talking about it annoying yeah
yes and what it conceals and what he
would say is the danger and he also said
this is the saving power within the
danger is the same a bonus holder in
there right is is is is the danger is
that this is what demarcates this
understanding of everything that is the
understanding of being of our time is
that it is what it what it what it
conceals is that there's anything
concealed right okay optimizes so
everything's available everything is
including ourselves we are now part of
the standing reserve and
which if you just look at our attitudes
about ourselves is like we look at her
bodies like it's something dislike look
let's hack the out of this thing
let's let's extract all of these things
and make and release all the potential
out of ourselves so that we can
harnessed it and order it and that is so
deep in it's both outside and it's him
and I think what what Verve a key is is
talking about with the meaning crisis
what Jordan Hall his determination is
sense of like deep urgency right called
like fierce urgency and like system's
thinking it's all on some level it's
it's it's through harkening this sense
of the concealment of all that is right
then get fullness of me right and in
that and that I think this is what
really Heidegger brings to for that I
really resonate with which is like we're
in a time we're being is present in its
complete withdrawal and that so if you
want to read if you want to reveal like
being notice like look at where it's
withdrawing because that's where it is
Jack Stein was saying in alchemy or
something is it is that you have to look
at the Putra fication or you have to
look at that at the at the image of you
know the most the Sun you have to look
where it where it's impossible to look
where you you cannot look because it's
too much of it's just shocking it's too
terrible it's too yeah and it's it's
it's it's too it's too you know you
could almost use the word evil for it or
something you know this dehumanizing
force yeah yeah yeah yeah absolutely and
and that's the question I think that
we're on some level whether or not we
can conceptualize it or
like like there's a I think one of the
thing that is gathering this we that we
can somehow call a we this corner of the
universe is it's like real orientation
to listening right to that which is no
longer calling like we can hear that
that did objects and people in our lives
and the structures of institution that
they they're no longer things don't have
any sense to them they like hmm they
don't have and sense right and and I
think this is I think that a lot of a
lot of the symptoms symptoms is why
we're like people are getting so
moralistic because on some level they're
trying to bring sense into this
deprecation of things not making any
sense morality then we get shallow
morality instead of genuine ethics or
genuine action or or you know yeah the
schools make you stupid the money makes
you poor and medicine makes you sick
that was a quote that grades aqueduct
was a quest a yeah so it's weird so it's
like while so people are so for example
I'm you can see that the the you know
people's moralistic responses to things
that cannot be penetrated by any kind of
rationality or reason right it's like
they just go is that where religio comes
in to use to use John's phrase or or
religion because mmm-hmm all you have a
shallow morality if you don't have a
deep religio I think yeah it's one of
the things I think that implicitly is a
vocht in relationship right which is
basically religio I think my I I don't
know if I understand it completely but I
think I think what that highlights is
the enactment of the religion its thee
so so date you familiar with David
Bentley Hart
we heard yes sure I really like a lot of
people really irritated by him but I
think he's this really funny and he's he
is so
smart like the guy is just he's really
really smart and he's very pompous I
keep meaning to read his book actually
because he says a lot of again yeah he
has a sort of offensive yeah comes on in
this offensive way but then he always
says something that sticks with you yeah
and he's he's white he's a modern
theologian that actually grappled with
continental philosophy which is not not
that present in theologian so he's it's
very living about his thinking he's he's
he like he's encountered Heidegger and
wrestled with it and he's he's still
grappling with his it's alive and one of
the things he said so a lot a lot of how
he's become popular amongst you know
non-academics is is through writing
books in response to the to atheism to
the you know the new yes ran and I think
and I really kind of got this and I
think this exemplifies religio when he
was speaking to a claim by I think
Dawkins is like well like how can you
say that there's a God how can you prove
it like put like how can you prove it
like you know that that whole thing I'm
sure they're gonna be like well okay so
if we were to run like well if we were
to run an experiment what we would need
to do mr. Dawkins is you need to like in
the way that he's talking about God
right the way that like a David Hart in
the crook like the Christian at the
deepest sense of the word the theistic
sensibility about God he's like well
what you would need to do is you would
need to probably spend two three years
going to church praying going in
contemplative prayer doing
Alecto Divina going through the rivers
rights the ceremonies the confessions
the he's like and then like two three
years later right then we can take a
look from that we could have a
conversation about religion right yeah
it's like like then then and then we can
start to talk about the presence it the
proof of the presence of God and I think
this is what I think verb a key i my
understanding of her vague
is when he's talking about participatory
knowing that there's participatory
knowing is part of what it's knowing
through being presence and so the
enactment of participating in the
religion right is so intimately woven
with God right so you can could just get
the sense of like if Dawkins went did
that for three years it's very feasible
that he would come out at the end of
that he'd be like yeah whoa
the presence of God right is you can't
devote you can't uncollapse it from the
the knowing of participation yeah and so
I think we're baekje is kind of
basically coming along with like religio
is like well perhaps perhaps what we
just need to do is not pretend like we
can have a proposition that's
unscientific like lo let's you can't
kiss you can't that's already happened
we're so imbued with science and
technology that we understand ourselves
in it right you can't just decide not to
be so I think what what what Verbeck
he's doing is he's not trying to piss in
the wind of history he's basically kind
of really taking our fate and seeing and
this is what I think is the right way to
respond to this age of technology is not
not being again but like developing it
beyond itself mmm I think I think I
sense that sensibility in ver baekje and
what he's doing is he's not trying to
start a religion he's trying to disclose
the the intelligibility of all those
practices well actually that was Birds
kind of criticism of him that's like oh
you you're actually what you're talking
about is religion you know yeah that is
religion right the rest of it is the
what your kritis what we're criticizing
what Dawkins is criticizing you know is
a dead religion you know so we don't
have to believe in the God that Dawkins
doesn't believe in right either but
there's something we're talking about
we're talking about the fundamental sort
of
communal aspect of humanity and and
that's that begins in the first stone
yeah but you then that you build of the
first temple right yeah totally so yeah
that's what we are sort of so so right
so so I always I but I wouldn't want to
go we don't want to go back to an Iron
Age really yeah but but we wanted as you
say disclosed and this is where I think
the essence of it I think with bard in
response to Bard
first of all bark like bard if I I've
been listening to bard everything I can
like all the videos that come out in his
books a bard
is like he's something man I like him a
lot yeah in in a he's I just get this
sense he's on fire like there's used to
be he's Nietzsche with the hammer
yeah he's exactly exactly what the
hammer in the same and the way that John
is Socrates are you know
Socrates with the question you know Bart
is Nietzsche with the hammer it's nice
actually we're gonna we're going to get
those two together in Toronto and I'm
looking I'm looking forward to that
April yeah looking forward to that and I
have a feeling that there is something
paradoxical there yeah right cuz it's
like when he says so for example in in
bards response to it he's like like no
it's not that we don't want to get rid
of the religion and like and do this
kind of weird kind of emergent sense of
you know you know he talks about when he
starts breaking things apart right
hitting with with the hammer actually I
think when he says no we need to be more
religious right to I sense an echo of
that is I think that there's a way in
which they're actually I don't think
they're talking about the same thing but
I think they're talking about that which
has multiple aspects to it
mmm-hmm trait but there's something that
there's something there wedded to and I
have a feeling that see so the palace
right and I don't know if I understand
exactly what he means by that but I
but based on what I do understand or my
misunderstanding see it strikes me is
like it it's actually very penetrating
to like there's a penetration quality to
it but the penetration right now is like
if for example we can no longer have a
proposition right that demarcates
metaphysics right like that you just we
can't we we can't make ourselves believe
in that anymore like it's it's that's
our fate we are in a new age right that
even even deeply rather like that maybe
we can make ourselves believe in that
maybe maybe there's all kinds of things
that happen that we don't understand
exactly exactly
well that thing that we we can believe
in that we don't understand all right I
think what I think what it's that right
which is where the phallus needs to
penetrate right mmm it doesn't need to
propose and make a claim right of like
this is it right then you start to evoke
all of the things that like
historically have just made things go to

right mm-hmm but I think the penetration
is in is actually being able to stay
with the mystery and reveal the
ontological mystery with to that which
cannot be proposed be housed in a
proposition and that that actually
besides that that is the thing that
animates our lives