[Music]
hey guys this is a short intro to a
series that we're putting out about
psychedelics and it's just so happen
that we've ended up with about three
pieces at the same time around the same
topic and this we just want to do a
little bit of an intro to it I think
it's also interesting to link
psychedelics to what we've talked about
on the channel before because I think
the link is maybe not immediately
obvious but a lot of the people we've
had on have talked about the crisis in
meaning so the meaning crisis which you
could see as a kind of meta crisis that
is influencing all aspects of our lives
and a big part of the meaning crisis as
well is the crisis how do we make sense
of the world how do we find truth how do
we communicate with each other how do we
trust each other psychedelics are really
important I think because they can break
people out of fixed small tunnelled
cognitive traps one of the reasons are
so good therapeutically and they can
help us to step back from our own
ideology and have that space and to be
able to think more flexibly if they're
used correctly and they're not always
used correctly but they have that
potential genuinely to break us out of
these tribal eyes ideological camps that
we're in now where we can't talk to each
other there's no good faith conversation
we're not meeting each other fully from
a place of genuine interest and you know
trying to get somewhere together
psychedelics have that potential but
that requires a lot of work and a really
solid framework around them and we don't
really have that yet yeah it's
fascinating that this psychedelic
Renaissance is happening in the middle
of this meaning crisis and I think the
two are definitely linked you can go
back to the sort of really high profile
debates between Sam Harris and Jordan
Peterson and you could argue that's
about the meaning crisis as well but how
do we make sense of the world do we need
it do we need a religious framework to
do so the one thing that they do agree
on is the value of psychedelics or the
importance of psychedelics Sam Harris
has written a lot about how meaningful
he's found a psychedelic experiences
Jordan Peterson hasn't talked openly
about his own psychedelic experience has
been he has at the core of his maps of
meaning lecture is a lot of talk about
the value of psychedelics the importance
of psychedelics the fact that they show
there is the mystery of consciousness
there is this experience that
materialist science has no idea how to
process whatsoever but can be very
meaningful very very therapeutic and
it's it's also replicable and as an
expert is an experience of the mystery
the divine or something that can be
reliably replicated in people and we
have no not even any framework for so
regular viewers to the channel might
know that this is something that we've
both been interested in for quite a
while I've done pieces about it for the
BBC and for Channel 4 News going back
about first one was in about 2008 so
I've been following this story for quite
a while what's really interesting about
the films were putting out now is that
there feels like there's a real shift so
for a while that the enthusiasm was
about psychedelic the psychedelic
Renaissance that these substances were
being used as medicines somehow the
films that we're putting out are a
little bit more cautionary there are but
I think that reflects where the
conversation is at right now among
people in the psychedelic community who
are still very enthusiastic about the
potential of psychedelics for medicine
and for cultural transformation but are
also feeling like well we've got to be
careful here and I think we'll talk
about the different areas of that but
maybe we'll talk a little bit about our
kind of backgrounds first yeah so around
the same time you were covering that for
the BBC I wrote a novel around
psychedelics and it was a you know I'd
say psychedelics one of the most
formative things in my development into
my life and as I had an article in The
Guardian which got some really angry
comments actually underneath it at the
time it also 2009 and then I'm one of
the organizers of a conference called
breaking Convention which happens every
two years it's around psychedelic
science and culture it's been growing
and growing as well
so my own personal trajectory has also
been one of extreme excitement into
extreme caution and then up into kind of
a hopeful excitement but tempered with
caution because I've seen I've seen lots
of
different ways people have used
psychedelics lots of ways they've used
them that would have been better they
never taken them at all I've seen a lot
of ways in which it has not impacted the
culture like it like they could have and
so there is I think I'm probably not the
only one in you know in the community
who feels like that around them so
putting out three pieces one is called
magic medicine question mark asking the
question whether they are whether they
can be used effectively as medicines so
there's been a lot of research done in
the UK in London at Imperial College
around psilocybin - the active
ingredient in magic mushrooms being used
for depression and the idea being that
it can get us out of rumination it can
get us out of habitual ways of thinking
that a characteristic of depression and
a camera crew was allowed into the end
of the first pilot study and captured
the experience of three people and
what's interesting about that film is
that it shows a very mixed picture a
very mixed picture so it's it's
something of a cautionary tale and so
we've got some clips from that film and
then an interview with the director and
with the psychologist who led many of
the sessions were sitting in there with
the the participant at the end of the
day when they're talking through their
experience you're left with this
profound sense of respect for the
process but that person's unconscious
mind was somehow able to take them on
this journey back towards some kind of
health or a journey with a step in the
direction of balance and health we've
also got a piece with Gabor mat√© a
course psychedelic therapy we then got
an interview with Jamie Weil who we've
had them at the channel before expert in
flow States and he he's really sounding
the alarm on where the psychedelic
Renaissance is at right now and the
dangers of big pharma coming in of
narcissistic kind of the dark side of
psychedelics had can lead to
narcissistic inflation and he's pretty
much saying he thinks that the
psychedelic Renaissance is headed off
he's pretty clear about that he says
that the the forces in play already are
unstoppable and that's where that's
where it's going and then also
gabble Matt a the Canadian doctor who
works a lot with addiction and he talks
about how it can be used how
psychedelics can be used to treat
addiction I think I'm actually far more
pessimistic and concerned actually in
ways that I didn't even anticipate
coming out of stealing those are just
the factors I'm watching you know and
and and I would imagine that I mean a
they're all already happening so none of
this is sort of you know Cassandra
you know magining worse scenarios and
saying well what if that happens these
are all already happening the question
is just where do they lead us I think
it's really interesting Jamie's points
you know when I listen to them resonated
a lot because they he talks about this
kind of psychedelic narcissism and this
kind of Instagram efficacious of the
psychedelic experience and people are
like hey I'm in Peru drinking ayahuasca
and I'm there's just the lack of
structure and the lack of integrity that
a lot of people working with those
plants are showing and it's just what
what struck me is that psychedelics
traditionally and through shamanism are
so different in the way they were used
to the kind of mimimi narcissism culture
you know it was very much a case of like
a big part of the psychedelic
experiences is being able to sit with
pain and to be able to go through an
experience that is not glamorous that is
not something you want to share that is
actually traditionally been sacred so
you don't share it around it's even the
illusion in mysteries which used to
happen in ancient Greece were you know
they almost certainly used a psychedelic
substance you weren't allowed to talk
about it at all
with anyone and the one one man was you
know there's a record of someone doing
it in his house for his friends and that
was like punishable by death you know so
just the sheer contrast of how
psychedelics have been used and what
Jamie wheel is talking about with this
narcissistic
appearance only culture is is a bizarre
state of affairs to be in so I think
we've both had this sense for quite a
while of when is it going to break
through
come more mainstream and feeling oh it's
now it's now it's now and it definitely
has now and we're in the middle I think
everyone would acknowledge we're in the
middle of the psychedelic Renaissance if
the original psychedelic wave was the
1960s we're back in the Renaissance and
I think the the publication of Michael
Pollan's book how to change your mind
was a big moment there but the
conversation has definitely shifted and
now the conversation is are we in danger
of replicating some of the mistakes of
the 1960s where we had this huge
exuberance around it and then the though
the dark side of psychedelics came in
more and more and it became increasingly
undeniable as to that dark side we
realized as one of the the people in in
the films we were putting out talks
about them they are nonspecific
amplifiers and this is something a lot
of enthusiasm at psychedelics don't
necessarily acknowledge they're not they
will amplify anything that you're
feeling and by definition they will
amplify everything in the culture as
well and it's not it's not necessarily
just a positive thing I mean I think
it's good to also step back about forty
thousand years to the original
psychedelic Renaissance arguably was you
know there was a big shift in human
beings and our capacity to make art make
culture and some have linked that to
increase use of psychedelics then even
John robic he has talked about this a
couple of times as well that role
psychedelics have played in our
development as a species and it's very
rare that psychedelics are just in the
entire culture it's really rare john
vivec he talks about this really well
around you know still tended to be only
a few people were taking them though the
shaman would take the psychedelics and
be able to tap into a different way of
seeing be able to connect patterns
together that no one else could and go
hey the Bison are moving that way
tomorrow people have the hel as you know
that because he knows shaman actually
means he who knows or she he or she even
knows person who knows so you have
access to some information but not
everyone had access to the information
so at the risk of putting on a very very
unpopular opinion I've come to the
conclusion not conclusion but I wander
often whether psychedelics should ever
become
mainstream or whether they should be
used after training like you know we
don't let everyone is drive a car who
wants to or pilot a plane there's a
training process that is involved in
that and that's the way it's been for a
very very long time in fact that's the
way we figured out as a species how to
use to academics safely so that's an
open question for me
are we playing with fire so if you look
back at the 60s and the first sort of
psychedelic wave you see this incredible
level of creativity you see the level of
but the music that came out at the time
was heavily influenced by it it was this
kind of liberation of creative energy
for sure I also question whether they
are playing exactly the same role as
they did in the past and there's a sort
of a sense of there were there are a lot
of kind of mental straitjackets to break
out of in the 60s that I'm not entirely
sure are the same nowadays and what I've
perceived in the psychedelic community
is a lot of actually a lot of groupthink
a lot of very very similar perspectives
like the idea that there's a kind of
narrative in a psychedelic community
which is yeah everyone else is following
this kind of corporate programming and
free your minds with psychedelics and
then you'll be kind of be able to see
through the patterns you'll be able to
see what's really going on which tends
to degenerate into outright conspiracy
theory a lot of the time like huge
amounts of conspiracy conspiratorial
thinking within the psychedelic
community and very similar
conspiratorial thinking as well which is
sort of I think is is mostly a
projection of sort of internal stuff out
into the world unresolved internal stuff
out into the world but also even the
there's very little political diversity
in the psychedelic community nowadays
which if psychedelics were kind of had
the effect of freeing our minds you
would expect more diversity not less
whereas I think what it often does is
becomes a bit an induction into it into
a way of thinking about the world that
seems very it's another form of
groupthink
yeah and and that there's a phrase that
psychedelics are nonspecific amplifiers
from stanislav grof and if you are in an
environment that is a certain way and
you take a psychedelic it you know has a
certain amount of preconceptions about
the experience has a certain political
leaning is most likely that that will be
enhanced in you so it can create a
certain filter bubbles very powerfully I
mean it's also an open question for me
this point about political diversity I
don't think I've met maybe 0.1% of the
people I've met the psychedelic
community are not quite left-leaning I
mean it's really like it's almost
impossible to find someone who isn't so
that is that begs the question of okay
either it's that point I just laid out
that is free self reinforcing or is
there something about the psychedelic
experience itself that lends itself to
for example social constructivism which
which arguably it could in a certain
context because the psychedelic
experience does deconstruct and does
give you the sense of there's multiple
different narratives and frameworks and
I can kind of see which is true anyway
but also that if that's not tempered by
kind of grounding in truth it can just
go haywire into what you're just talking
about conspiracy theory groupthink and
unfortunately that's where I've seen it
going so yeah we're putting out films
about psychedelics they're all a bit of
a downer and but I think that's where
the conversation is at right now I think
it is that is pretty much the cutting
edge of the conversation there's still a
lot of enthusiasm and potential for
psychedelics that a lot of people in the
community are feeling but increasingly I
think many of the people in the psychic
community I'm aware of are kind of
feeling a little concerned about some of
the ways that things are going
yeah and rightly so and this is a
natural part of the process as something
goes through a revival then all of the
shadow material I think as well all the
dark side of it also needs to be looked
at and I think it's essential because
they are they are incredible substances
if use in the right way and they do have
incredible potential but I think
everyone who's involved with them needs
to kind of show up and grow up around
them so we'll be putting up the other
films over the next few days and
do enjoy them comment on them let us
know what you think and see you soon
[Music]
you