[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so last time we took a
look at the second half of Aristotle and
his further developments of the axial
ages understanding meaning and wisdom
and we took a look more at though what
you might call the world side of things
and we took a look at Aristotle's
worldview the two components his
conformity theory which is an important
alternative understanding of knowledge
it's a contact epistemology an intimate
knowing and being with something and how
plausible that contact epistemology
actually is and then we also looked at a
plausible turned out to be false but a
plausible model of the world that is
very consonant and consistent with that
conformity theory this is a world a
geocentric world that is moved by
natural motion it's a cosmos and then we
use that to discuss how the theory of
the world and the theory of how we know
the world and be within the world are
intimately mutual intimately connected
and mutually supporting and you get
worldview attunement and how that
creates existential modes in which we
are Co identifying the agent and the
arena and creating the meta meaning the
the the relationship that makes all
individual acts and events and
situations and places meaningful for us
and how important that consonance is
between our existential mode and our
intellectual understanding and why
Aristotle is so prominent because of his
capacity to create a worldview that
lasts for a millennium and being so well
attuned a worldview we then paused from
our discussion of the axial age in
Greece and we moved to the actual age in
India for the explicit purpose of trying
to discuss the impact of the mindfulness
revolution
the part of the thesis of the series is
the mindfulness revolution is in
response to the meaning crisis in the
West and the growing confluence between
Buddhism and cognitive science is an
attempt to address and provide solutions
to the meeting crisis in the West we
started by looking at the figure who
epitomizes the axial revolution within
ancient India and that's the Tartar
Gotama and we began by looking at his
myth his mythological biography if you
want to put it that way and I remind you
again how I am using the word myth and
we began by taking a look at his early
life within the palace we stepped aside
and examined the palace as a
mythological representation of a
particular existential mode we talked
about two different existential modes
following the work of Fromm it's also
convergent of work for Boober and other
important thinkers Stephen Bachelor is
going to make use of this distinction
etc from talks about two modes to
existential modes the having mode that's
organized around meeting are having
needs in which we pursue perceive the
world categorically we want to
manipulate it and solve our problems and
control it and that being mode which is
organized around our being needs these
are needs that are met by becoming
something mature virtuous love and we
then talked about the possibilities of
modal confusion being locked in the
having mode in trying to meet your being
needs within the having mode so trying
to meet your need for maturity by having
a car or meeting your need for being in
love by having lots of sex and we talked
about the fact that you can get in gate
you can become a meshed in modal
confusion and how that becomes a vicious
cycle because as your being needs are
frustrated you pursue evermore the miss
framed projects that the modal confusion
is giving you you try
more to have things as opposed to more
and more become what you need to become
and then I suggested to you that being
in the palace is a mythological
representation of this kind of modal
confusion in which we are stuck in the
having mode and of course this also had
one important cultural point and I did
say at the beginning that we would talk
about that we would develop a way of
talking about the connections between
the meaning crisis and other crisis we
are facing so issues about a market
economy and a commodification of
everything and everyone by inducing
modal confusion it is possible to sell
you more and as your identity becomes
more and more a political and economic
thing and commodity that should be
categorically understood and manipulated
the more and more I can sell you things
and sell you ideas and manipulate you
accordingly so this has important
ramifications for us now that's why it's
a myth because it has important
ramifications for us right now but as I
mentioned Siddhartha does not stay in
the palace he is his curiosity becomes
too great and there are all kinds of
variations on this story and I don't
think there is an absolute canonical way
of saying it but he decides to leave the
policy goes out in his chariot with his
charioteer Chandra and they're
travelling around and he sees a sick
person and he's distressed what's wrong
with that person what he's and Chandra
says My lordy he's he's he's sick and
said Arsenal what did he do to cause
that and it's like nothing that's just
it it happens to everybody everybody
gets sick at some point it's just part
of the way of things you can see this is
like this is the axial Awakening right
remember the axial revolution is
awakening about what's actually going on
in the soft
in the world and so siddharta is like
very distressed it's like what but you I
could get sick too and Chandra said well
of course of course I mean part of the
conceit of the myth is that Chandra is
sort of oblivious to sit hard his whole
history which is of course unbelievable
but it's that's the point of a myth to
get you to realize things not to
convince you about historical truths so
sit artists distressed and he says take
me away from here I don't want I don't
want to see this anymore and so they dry
they drive along and right they meet an
old person and should ours stop stop is
this a person sick as well no my lord
he's not sick he's old old we mean well
this happens to everyone through the
passage of time you mean he didn't do
anything but no it wasn't any it's not
his fault he just he's become old and
now Siddharth is like no okay let's go
back to the palace this is really bad so
they're making their way back to the
palace he's trying to return to that
right that self enclosure of the pure
having mode but you know that's the
thing about confusion once it starts to
be dissipated you can't return to it so
he's trying to return and of course he
meets a funeral procession there's a
corpse and said harness said is what is
that present sick are they old so no
that person is dead they're dead
they're not alive anymore what but why
is well my lord it happens to everybody
now do you see what's happened here the
having mode has been completely
undermined it's been completely
undermined and Siddhartha is
experiencing an existential crisis
because this is happening at the level
of his existential mode that's what it
means that when we talk about an
existential crisis
so he's like get me back to the palace
absolutely now and so now there's a mad
dash and as he's trying to get back to
the palace and tried to enfold himself
back into that world
he meets one more thing one more person
actually he meets a mendicant he meets
one of these people that has given up
the having mode they were called
renowned sirs because they have
renounced the world of the palace of
luxury and there's a deep peace in this
man's eyes and the contrast right and
think think about think about how again
this is not just a matter of belief this
is a matter this is happening in his
entire being his entire being is
resonating with this distress because
it's the whole way in in which he is
coupled to the world that has been
suddenly thrown into confusion there's
all of this happening this deepest and
the contrast with the peace that he sees
in the man's eyes he's any in terms of
genre said who is this and Chandra said
it's Amanda kin it's a it's a it's it's
a wandering person and that person of
course represents is the introduction
not the intellectual introduction but
the direct confrontation with the being
mode this is a person who has realized
peace and siddharta feels that contrast
poignant Lee powerfully painfully so he
returns to the palace with these four
signs burning in him the illness the old
age the death but also this
representative of the being mode
somebody who's cultivated wisdom and
peace found some kind of deep
connectedness that is untouched by
the vicissitudes of our mortality but of
course siddharta cannot find the piece
he wants he cannot get back to the
palace look that think about the double
senses of this word because it's really
pertinent here disillusionment when we
describe somebody as disillusioned we're
usually talking about a state in which
they are perhaps moving towards despair
they're sad they've experienced loss
it's a negative state but notice that
the heart of it is the loss of illusion
this is an axial aged thing he is losing
the illusion of modal confusion and he's
the lute he's losing that sense of
belonging that he had when he was in the
palace he doesn't belong there anymore
he tries he tries to make it work we're
gonna talk about this later we're gonna
talk about this why is it after people
have these kinds of awakening
experiences they feel that they need to
transform their whole lives that they
can't go back that there's something
irreversible about it this is something
we're going to directly talk about in
fact can we get a cognitive scientific
purchase on that but he can't go back
the disillusionment is too real
so he decides to leave and this this is
not an easy choice he has a wife he has
a child and we may in fact even
ethically criticize him
I mean he's abandoning his son he's
abandoning his wife but there's a sense
here that and and of course we should
make moral reflection we should make
moral arguments but what the myth is
saying is the moral life sits upon
something deeper they're carrying out
your moral responsibilities well
important of course can ultimately be
rendered meaningless if you've lost
meaning morality sits on depends upon
your life being meaningful and we're
going to talk about this a lot later
when we talk about the work of Susan
wolf and others the meaning in life and
then within the psychological work about
this right now meaning in life is
different from and I would argue that
this myth says is deeper than simply
leading a moral existence they see
there's something more to wisdom than
just morality see virtue is also about
right that that that meaningfulness that
meta meaning it's ultimately about being
plugged into the cultivation of wisdom
not just doing what is morally correct
so Siddhartha leaves the pile he cuts
his hair leaves the palace goes into the
forest and he decides to follow the path
of the renouncers and try to cultivate a
solution to the fear and the turmoil Ida
still reverberating within him so
he pursues various he meets up with
various teachers and he pursues various
things but he gets into he gets into
another troubled spot because although
he leaves the palace there's an
important sense of which he hasn't left
they're having mode because he's still
he's still carrying that confusion
because what he's pursuing is he's
pursuing asceticism he's trying to
subject to the body to tremendous trial
and pain trying to bring it into
complete submission so he's he's
practicing self-denial I mean you can
see why this would make sense right
the palace was all about self-indulgence
so surely the solution is self-denial I
mean that seems reasonable think about
how often we do these swings between
self-indulgence and self-denial so he
starves himself to the point where you
can see his spine from the front of his
body because his belly is so withdrawn
and gaunt it's pressing against the
vertebra of his back he looks like some
anemic Specter in representations we
have of him from that period but but
it's not working it's not working
because do you see what's still going
wrong do you see it trying to annihilate
the self is still thinking about having
a self he's still in the having mode
he's just transferred it from having
bodily things to trying to have his self
yes he's trying to throw it away because
he but he's still framing it in the
having mode he's still understanding the
problem in the having mode he's still
modally confused self-denial is as much
an aspect of this confusion as
self-indulgence because it's merely the
negation of self-indulgence it is not
its transcend
when you negate something you are still
framing it in the same way so he's
sitting on the banks of a river and he's
fatiguing and he hears a barge going
down the river and there's a musician
playing and there's a musician has his
apprentice and it's a liar a stringed
instrument have come some kind and he's
saying to the apprentice no no no no
listen listen to me you the strings
can't be too tight and they can't be too
loose too tight is just as bad as too
loose and think about Aristotle right
think about Aristotle right we're at the
golden mean which doesn't mean just the
middle point in some sort of average and
I say that because of how this has come
to be understood this is Winston Syd
hardly discovers the middle path
it doesn't mean some you know
compromising middle a solution it means
a radical Reformation right the middle
path is to cut is to transcend the
having mode by rejection rejecting both
self-indulgence and its negation
self-denial right
we're gonna talk about this a lot more
when we talk about optimization
strategies we talked about it remember
when we talked about flow you're not
trying to maximize you're trying to
optimize you're trying to get the right
connectedness and see that's what the
being modes all about is about being
connected in the right way so siddharta
has this realization in the story he the
realization is come he tumbles into the
river and he's drowning and a little
girl saves him which is I mean in the
culture of the time that's extremely
demeaning for a man who was once a
prince to be saved by a little girl
it points to the radicalness of the
change that's occurring for him she
gives him sort of the equivalent of rice
pudding
that's why on bode day Buddhists will
often eat rice pudding to celebrate that
fact so he realizes he must pursue the
middle path he must find a way of
optimizing his cognition that allows him
to transcend and rediscover this missing
mode the mode that he saw in the eyes of
the mendicant now this is important
because this is the word for that kind
of remembering sati it means to remember
to remind not just like a fact it means
to be it means to bring it to mind so
this is um this is a modal memory this
is remembering a lost mode of being
there's not remembering some a fact or
event this was remembering what it is
like to be in the being mode it is to
recover a mode it is a deep kind of
restructuring of your being it doesn't
mean just simply remembering or
reminding yourself it's like when you go
back to a place that you haven't been
for a while and you start to recover and
remember an identity you used to have
there you go well you are away from the
place you will remember the facts in the
event but when you go there ah right
this is what it was like to be me at
this time it's that kind of remembering
it's a modal memory right it's it's it
has to do with that participatory
knowing we were talking about Satara is
trying to remember the being mode it's
in the eyes
of the renown sir now why do I bring
this word up and go on about this
because this is the word that is
translated today by this term
mindfulness but I bet you when I say
mindfulness especially if you're in
touch with this revolution that is
sweeping our culture you probably didn't
think of remembering the being mode now
there's some astute authors who describe
it that way
Stephen Bachelor did in a beautiful
little book called along with others
that I heartily recommend siddharta is
going to pick up on these psycho
technologies of mindfulness that he's
learned from his teachers but he found
inadequate because he's going to
transform them because he precisely
wants to remember he wants to recover
it's a better word I would think the
being mode not as an intellectual idea
but as his very agency and the very way
in which the world is realized in
conjunction and Co identification with
that agency so I want to stop now this
story we're gonna pick it up and how
what Siddhartha does in order to bring
about this recovery but I'm gonna give
you one way of thinking about it that
we're gonna build towards another way in
which you remember in this sense of sati
is when you wake up remember we talked
about this as one of the metaphors the
myths that people use for talking about
self transcendence there's enlightenment
there's waking up there's going from
being a child to an adult we're come
we'll come back to these again and again
but why when I wake up this is not like
when I just remembered yes an event when
I'm like right now and I remember oh yes
without the hall when I wake up I
recover my world and my identity I
deeply remember and even look at what
this word means to belong to to be a
member I belong again to myself into the
world that's what happens when I'm
waking up and Siddhartha wants a
mindfulness psycho technology in fact in
fact not just a psycho technology a set
of psycho technologies that are going to
help him remember recover sati the being
mode he is going to awaken and that's in
fact what his title means buddha is not
a name buddha is a title it means the
awakened one but we need to talk about
the cognitive science of mindfulness
because we are here looking at siddharta
precisely because of the mindfulness
revolution that's happening here and now
today and the mindfulness revolution is
a response to the meaning crisis and we
can see why it is even better if we
reset it within Siddhartha's myth
because we see that he's cultivating
mindfulness to cultivate awakening
because awakening is a way of responding
to the meaning crisis hence the title of
this series awakening from the meaning
crisis but as a cognitive scientist I'm
critical and both are both appreciative
of all of the scientific work that's
being done on mindfulness but I'm also
critical of it as a good scientist
should be so I want to talk a little bit
about how we can understand and better
formulate what it meet what mindfulness
means and this is based on work that I
published in 2016 with Leo Ferraro on
mindfulness
so again why am I doing this if we want
to awaken from the meaning crisis if we
want to understand what sitar does
awakening was we've got to understand
what mindfulness meant to him and what
it meant to him is precisely the set of
psycho technologies that brings about
awakening and part of what I want to
show is how can we get back to an
understanding of mindfulness and it's
constitutive psycho technologies that
will afford precisely that how can we
get a deeper understanding of the cause
of the cognitive processes at work in
mindfulness and how they can afford such
important existential transformation so
if you ask people who are pursuing
mindfulness practices meditation
contemplative practices also try and
argue later why those shouldn't be
treated as synonyms for example even
though they often are they'll give you a
sort of standard understanding of what
mindfulness is and what I want you to
first note is how much it is not picking
up on what we've already said about sati
so people will tell you that to be
mindful what you're trying to do is pay
attention to the present moment in a
non-judgmental fashion trying to learn
how to notice there's that there's
there's a hint
look there's this there's this there's
this hint of the being mode remembering
the being mode still there because I'll
say it's about being present there
invoking right the being mode but
they're doing it in a way that well
helpful is maybe misleading
now I want it I want to make sure that
you're understanding what I'm
criticizing what I'm not criticizing in
order to do that let me tell you a
little bit more I both study mindfulness
scientifically and do work on it
experiments and published theoretical
work on it I also teach I teach it as I
mentioned I teach meditative practices
contemplative practices and I teach
extracurricular Tai Chi Chuan which is a
form of moving mindfulness so I am
familiar with both the academic attempt
to explain mindfulness and the
pedagogical attempt to teach it and I
think it's important to have a foot in
both of those worlds to realize a way in
which you can become confused in your
attempts to understand mindfulness we
need to avoid confusion by making a
distinction we avoid mortal confusion by
recovering the distinction between the
having mode and the being mode we can
get deeply confused about mindfulness if
we do not remember the distinction
between the language of training and the
language of explaining
this is the language I use when I'm
teaching people meditation and
contemplation of Tai Chi I use language
that helps them acquire the skills in
this is language of imitation and
involvement and I can depend on our
presence together I can depend on the
pragmatics of the situation I can depend
on the fact that their goal is that they
want to acquire the skill and so I'll
use language there that's appropriate
for that but if I was simply to use that
language unquestioningly here I would
make a mistake let me give you an
example and I'm going to use an example
from memory because of the connections
I'm making between mindfulness and
memory one of the most powerful ways you
can train your memory is to use what's
known as the method of location or the
method of Llosa if you want to sound
more pretentious okay so some of you
might have watched the Sherlock series
Sherlock does this with his mind palace
right so what you do is you memorize the
space you memorize the rooms right so
you can visualize them in your mind
and that what if I want to I want to
remember a bunch of things let's say I
want to remember stuff associated with
Socrates then I have a figure of
Socrates here and then I put a bunch of
other images there in that location and
then I now I want to remember some stuff
about Plato and I have some other things
here some other images and I put a bunch
of images sorted with Plato and so forth
and then what I do in order to remember
what I need to remember I call this up I
go into this room and I have all the
images and they're all tightly
associated together and I get all the
information I need from Socrates and
then I go and then I move in my mind
Palace to where played it there the
Plato room is and I unfolded and this is
powerful the orders that the ancient
world could use the method of locations
right - in order to memorize speeches
that would last up to six hours and we
know that this is a very powerful
mnemonic you should if you're a student
in your studying learn how to use this
it's not just how to become a
sociopathic
a superhero detective it is a good way
to become a student the method of
locations now notice this it is powerful
language of training it trains your
memory well now what you may do and this
would be a mistake is you may think this
is how memory is organized this is
called the spatial metaphor of memory
you may think oh well this is how memory
is organized all that all my memories
for one thing on are sort of stable
things like my image of Socrates during
a stable location and all the things
that right right that are associated in
my memory are actually closer together
in my memory so the way memory works is
I send in a little homunculus a little
memory guy also right and he searches
through the rooms until he finds the
right room and then he goes in the room
and everything's organized there and he
finds what he needs and then he brings
it out and then he passes it up to
consciousness huh and that's how I
remember right and we talked about
searching through our memory and
retrieving from our memory here's the
thing and Isaac and Kate Keane pointed
out this a long time ago the spatial
metaphor for memory is almost completely
wrong your memory does not work this way
it doesn't work this way that's a
mistake here I'll show you right so tell
me quickly other colors associated with
blue you'll say red green tell me other
words that rhyme with blue shoe new ok
so red is close to blue and shoe is
close to blue yes that means what else
is close shoe and red so when I say shoe
you should think of red do you of course
you don't
here's another way in which your memory
isn't laid out this way you rapidly know
when you don't know something what's
right what's Meryl Streep's phone number
I don't know have you ever been in
Bangkok no well what did Bob do did he
get on like some sort of hyperspace
motorcycle inside here like what did he
did he go to every place you've ever
been is that Bangkok is that Bangkok is
that Bangkok no he instantly knows you
instantly know that you weren't in
Bangkok he instantly knows that you
don't have Meryl Streep's phone number
he doesn't search all the space in fact
it looks like he doesn't search it at
all
okay memory is a lot more mysterious and
it does not operate in the simplistic
manner that the spatial amount metaphor
says that spatial metaphor is great for
training your language for training your
memory it is great for training your
memory but it is overly simplistic and
gets you to misunderstand listen to my
language how memory actually works the
language by which we train mindfulness
should not be imported critically into
our scientific attempts to explain it
and understand it
paying attention to the present moment
first of all I have to know what it is
to pay attention I'm gonna show you that
that's way more problematic than you
think it because you're probably
thinking its operating according to
another metaphor shining a spotlight I
pay attention the way I shine a
spotlight what's the present moment I
mean when I'm training you yeah we can
sort of just make it happen because we
can rely on the content but what's the
present moment right here right now
that gets that nanosecond this second
the last five minutes the last hour
what's the present moment see the word
present doesn't have a particular
meaning it's an it's called an indexical
it's relative to what I could what's
here what's now you see then people
think oh well I can tell you what being
the present moment is it's paying
attention to the here and now that's
useless what's here this spot I'm
standing on this room this City of
Toronto this solar system this universe
out of all of the universes in the
multiverse what's now see you're not
explaining anything that language helps
train people
but it's overly simplistic and
misleading when we're trying to
understand what we need to do is
reformulate mindfulness and we need to
do it in order to recover what siddharta
was talking about how can we understand
mindfulness such that it can tell us how
people can become awakened that's what
we need that's how we have to
reformulate mindfulness so let's try and
do that let's and let's make use of some
of the things we've already built upon
here we can we can we can bring in Plato
to help us and what a great ally that is
to have because do you remember what
Plato pointed out that our knowledge is
not captured just by a list of features
remember the bird isn't just the
wings the feather the beak it's also the
structural functional organization the
thing is if you look at most people's
definition of mindfulness even in
scientific articles all they give you as
a feature list to be mindful is being
present which we've got to do something
about because that's just language of
training it's not explanatory language
right not judging and then that's gonna
be problem at what do you mean not
judging I'm supposed to pay attention to
my breath and not pay attention to my
distractions that's a kind of judging
what do you mean not judging well right
what does it mean it's somehow supposed
to bring about right something like in
sight and that's going to be important
because in sight I'm going to argue is
on a continuum with awakening I'll tell
you what well explain what that means
and it's supposed to reduce your
reactivity you're supposed to become
more equanimous more balanced so you
know mindfulness is paying attention to
the present moment right being present
paying attention to the present moment
in a non-judgmental fashion that's
supposed to bring about insight the form
of meditation I teach the Buddhist form
it's claimed it goes back to Siddhartha
it's called the pasta the pasta means
insight obviously not just an
intellectual insight but an existential
insight right supposed to reduce
reactivity what does that mean now
that's a feature list we're missing the
eye dass we're missing the structural
functional organization that tells me
how all of those things actually go
together so this is what we need to do
we need to turn this feature list into a
feature schema we need to recover it's
missing structural functional
organization and we need
right we need to reinterpret all of
these things so we can actually explain
their functionality and we need to do
that by tying them to independently
write independently constructed theory
or theoretical claims within psychology
look we have people who are doing their
psychology in the cognitive science of
attention of insight of improved
self-regulation let's pay attention no
pun intended to what they're telling us
about how insight attention self-control
operate so one of the things you do to
turn to turn a feature list into a
feature schema is you make some
distinctions between the types of
features
so here's of these core four that we
keep seeing a lot being present not
judging or non judging insight right and
reduced reactivity I flip them up like
this because there's a distinction here
these are states that I can get into
right these are things I these are
things I can do so being present is
something I can do I can start it I can
stop it we're gonna have to come back to
what it means but we know it's an
activity you're engaging in because it's
constantly being disrupted while you're
meditating and you're constantly having
to engage in it and again and the same
thing with not judging not judging is
something you're doing it's a weird kind
of paradoxical not doing but again you
can start it it can stop you can restart
it again but these these are not things
you're doing these are results so to use
the language of psychology these are
states you can get into but these are
traits that you cultivate you want to
become more insightful you want to
become less
reactive so immediately we understand
away so these are things I do and these
are traits that I'm supposed to be
realized when I'm cultivating
mindfulness now questions immediately
emerge by making this distinction I can
ask this question how does being present
cause insight or how does being present
reduce reactivity why do does not
judging cause insight does not judging
cause reduce reactivity
what's the causal relation notice that
the feature list doesn't talk about this
at all it doesn't talk about how the
features are causally related it doesn't
talk about how the states can cause the
traits but it also doesn't ask
constitutive questions constitutive
questions are part whole relationships
what's what's this is this a part of
this is this a part of this are they
both part of some whole what's that
what's the structural relationship here
what about these is this part of this is
this part of this are they both part of
some whole see the feature list does not
have the ID AHS and by not having the I
dass or not looking for the I'd us it's
not asking any of these questions these
causal and constitutive questions now as
we start to answer these questions and
as we start to answer them with the
language of explaining rather than the
language of explaining we will turn a
feature list into a feature schema we
will start to get at the structural
functional organization of mindfulness
and we'll start to get a deeper
understanding of it and that will that
will help us to see how it is that
mindfulness can bring about the kind of
radical transformations that were
promised by Sid heart as realization
all right so I'm going to focus on this
one right now
and again we'll start by talking about
specific insights but obviously we're
not talking about this insider that
insight we're talking about a
fundamental existential modal kind of
transformation okay I've already said
this language is useless people say okay
well what I meant was something like
concentration that's that that can't be
right
that's that's not good enough because if
you take a look at sitar does attempt to
explain it he talks about right
concentration that's why I have
concentration here right
it's Satara is telling you that there's
right concentration what does that
strongly mean that there is wrong
concentration mindfulness isn't about
concentration is about getting the right
kind of concentration what does that
mean well all it means paying attention
okay right again you're using a
particular model for attention let's
talk about these two things a little bit
and let's talk about right let's talk
about what sit hearta and when he's
hearing not too tight not too loose for
the strings
first of all let's work our way up for
nominal ology I want you to compare two
ways of concentrating this is based on
work done by Ellen Langer who wrote
probably the first book on mindfulness
in the West called mindfulness in like
1988 way before the mindfulness
Revolution took off and there's a lot of
questions about what's the relationship
between her account and mindfulness and
the Buddhist I'm not getting into that
right now because that's not what I'm
trying to establish I'm just using her
way of trying to get you to understand
concentration okay so we're gonna do it
right here right now okay so I want you
to concentrate on my finger concentrate
on it kontin
trait concentrate concentrate on my
finger concentrate don't let your mind
wander concentrate okay so most of you
found that unpleasant and because notice
what the metaphor even says this is what
I'm doing I'm concentrating I'm making
my monolith menthe mind into a tunnel
and then I'm sort of sticking it on
something and trying to keep it there
and not let it move right and the only
training you were given was what I was
doing yelling concentrate concentrate
okay let's do it let's do it
let's do something else okay ready okay
I want you to look at my finger
I want you to notice that it's not
actually perfectly straight it's bent a
little bit and it's a little bit thicker
at the bottom than at the top and there
are sort of multiple sections to it and
it's a little bit red on once it's very
different wasn't it
she calls that soft vigilance because
what you're doing there is not or
externally hardening your mind and
sticking it on things what you're doing
is constantly trying to renew your
interest and this is a great word this
comes from right interesa to be within
something to be within something it's
about that conformity that Aristotle was
talking about what you're doing is
constantly exploring and opening it up
so we need a model of concentration that
does this soft vigilance that's
constantly renewing your interest
getting you deeply involved with
something because it's going to get you
intimately in contact with it so
what kind of attention are we talking
about and right we don't want too hard
those are the strings too hard
concentrate concentrate concentrate
strings are too hard too tight oh just
do it everyone that's too loose how can
we look notice how when I had you sort
of move over my finger it's almost like
a well-tuned string
it's almost got this musicality of
intelligibility to it well now you need
to understand what's going on with
attention because what I want to show
you is attention isn't a spotlight it's
it's a very complex optimization process
it's really about tuning and getting
between too tight and too loose and
allow you to becoming intimately
involved conformed to participating
interesa with ever with whatever you're
paying attention to okay so why do we
like the spotlight metaphor it's even
insect and you'll you'll find it in
psychology textbook attention is like a
spotlight hahahaha well because one of
the things that attention does is
captured very well by the spotlight
metaphor look when I shine a light on
something it makes that stand out it
makes it stand out because it's brighter
remember when things stand out that
salience it makes things more salient
that's what attention does it makes
things more salient attention is about
right now we're getting something and
that's what I was doing here I was
making things salient to you features of
my finger more salient to you what's
wrong with the spotlight well what's
wrong what's wrong with the spotlight
metaphors well it picks up on that
attention is about optimizing salience
it's missing so much of what that
optimization actually is and how it can
be connected to insight
so some excellent work done by
Christopher mall again very complex
argument and I'm not going to try and go
through the whole thing but so trying to
get into an understanding that attention
isn't something you directly do let me
let me try and give you a comparison
here walk and practice see walking is
something I can ask you to directly do I
can say walk when you walk start walking
stop walking start walking again great
but if I say to you practice God
practice you should say to me practice
what so you practice something by
optimizing how you're doing something
else if I'm practicing chess I'm not
playing chess and doing some other thing
practicing to practice chess is to
optimize how I play chess to practice
tennis is not to do tennis and some
additional secret action practicing what
I'm doing when I'm practicing tennis is
optimizing how I play tennis
now Mol's point is you don't directly
pay attention but it's not obvious to
you that that's the case because of both
the prevalence of the metaphor and have
skilled you are at paying attention but
this is how you pay attention you pay
attention by optimizing some other
process that's why when I ask you to pay
attention I can be asking you to do many
different things I can ask you to pay
attention and it means optimize your
seeing so that it becomes looking and
watching I can ask you to pay attention
and it means optimize your hearing so
that it becomes listening I can ask you
to pay attention and that means doing
the two together optimizing your looking
and your listening and so that they're
coordinated well together but notice if
I say to you I want you to pay attention
but I don't want you to do that by
optimizing or improving anything else
you're doing
and I want you to pay attention by
improving your looking or your listening
or your remembering I just want you to
directly pay attention come on do it
right now pay attention you don't know
what to do
see you pay attention by optimizing
other things you're doing now mole talks
about this as cognitive unison what when
we're optimizing what we're trying to do
is coordinate various processes so that
they're sharing the same goal and
working well together think about
Plato's idea about getting various
different systems to work well together
so what we need to understand is what is
attention what's how is it optimizing
how is it integrating things together
how does that get improved in
mindfulness practice and how does it
bring about insight not just an insight
into this problem or this problem but
the insight the systemic insight that is
awakening that motivates and empowers
people to radically transform themselves
so that they can escape from modal
confusion and other existential dilemmas
we'll take a look at that next time
thank you very much for your time
[Music]
you
you
[Music]