so today welcome back I am amazed that
you keep coming because it seems that we
have assaulted you with bad news ever
since we started we we told you about
climate being out of control we told you
that there are some aspects of the
environment that may never recovery you
know now that democracy is dying
and governments can't be trusted our
social media is mining our privacy and
last week we even learned that the
church is going down the tube so I mean
how do you keep getting the stamina to
get up and come back and hear more and
believe me you're going to get more
today because our guest this morning
thinks a lot about all of these things
and also about the crisis of meaning
itself dr. John Verve a key is an
assistant professor at the University of
Toronto in the psychology department and
the cognitive science program now just
for those of you who don't happen to
have your your phone on too quickly look
up cognitive science I will tell you
that cognitive science lives at the
intersection of philosophy psychology
artificial intelligence and neuroscience
anything else that's it he also he also
teaches Buddhism and it's connection to
mental health at the U of T also
he received an honors BA at McMaster
University in philosophy summa laude
an MA at the UT and philosophy a BSC it
with a specialist in cognitive science
at U of T and also a PhD in philosophy
at U of T he's been nominated many times
for his excellence in teaching including
the coveted prime ministers award his
book
zombies in the Western culture a 21st
century crisis and his weekly youtube
series awakening from the meaning crisis
examines the feeling of disconnectedness
in Western culture today dr. Verve a key
please come and help us gain some
insight into all of this negativism
and tell us about religion in the future
so thank you very much I guess I am
gonna bring you a bit boring bad news so
we'll see how that goes maybe a little
bit of good news it's rather personal
I mean I've actually got my tenure since
I sent the thing and so I'm now an
associate professor alright so let's get
right to it so if you take a look at a
recent survey in the United Kingdom you
get this kind of result eighty-nine
percent of the people 16 to 29 the
up-and-coming people claim that their
lives are meaningless not sort of off
what sort of could be better
meaningless that's how they actually
responded right the average overall was
80% for all groups and this is the
United Kingdom not some war-torn tore
war-torn part of the world right those
over 60 which includes I guess some of
you here you do the best you do the best
where the best is only 55% of that group
report that their lives are meaningless
that's the best group now a lot of the
people say that the reason why their
lives are meaningless is due to
financial reasons but this actually goes
against a lot of evidence that shows
that once you're out of poverty finances
do not contribute significantly to
meaning in life poverty really does
Hamra meaning in life but once you're
out of it
the things that seem to matter well
we're going to talk about some of them
but their connection there's two other
people connectedness to reality
those are the main issues but it's
interesting to note that many people
don't actually get that they think their
finances are what's the key problem many
of the elderly people or older people at
least 73 percent of them in fact say
that they are very lonely and have been
that way for years what we do know is
and this is more accurate 34 percent of
the people
said that mental health issues were
causing the lack of meaning and this
makes more sense because we know that
anxiety rates depression rates etc are
on the rise okay so this is yeah see
it's it's gonna get dark for a while so
Chris mr. Pietro and I we we do a thing
where we talk about sort of what we call
the symptom ology in the meaning crisis
we're trying to show a bunch of
different factors that make sense given
some of the data you just saw there's a
lot more data you can check out the book
so that that survey is just an
indication and one of the things we
talked about is you know that suicide
now worldwide suicide is going down
because poverty is going down worldwide
but for young people and for actually
some affluent parts the United States
like the Silicon Valley suicide rate is
going up child suicide rate in the
United States child means under 12 has
doubled in the last ten years
interestingly as I just mentioned you
have the overlap with the mental health
crisis and boy do I see this at the
University when I started teaching 25
years ago in a galaxy far far away long
time ago
alright I would get a student coming in
in distress maybe one or two a semester
I now get three or four a week which is
a very taxing on me as you can imagine
so we know that again this is going up
pretty much across North America Europe
I already mentioned there's increase in
loneliness the UK the UK is setting up a
Ministry of loneliness which sounds like
something out of Orwell the next thing
we know about is the rise of lots of new
forms of addiction I want to talk a bit
about addiction now let's in order to
talk about addiction let's talk about
modes of existence existential modes so
I'm gonna give you some philosophical
terms here they'll be they will be multi
syllabic with the intent to try and
impress you and so let's talk about this
idea from the psychologist Erich Fromm
that you have two basic kinds of needs
you have a having needs these are the
needs that are met these are largely
homeostatic needs these are needs better
met by having something I need to have
water I need to control it and consume
it I need to have air right and when I'm
in that mode right I'm in
problem-solving mode I'm trying to solve
my problems I'm trying to overcome the
obstacles to prevent me from getting
what I need
and so I relate to things very
categorically this is a cop this is
water this cop reminds me of all the
other cups I've had this water is very
similar to all the other water I've ever
had and that categorical thinking lets
me quickly solve my problems to get I
mean what I want this is called the
telic mode by Apter what that means is
as I get more and more arousal I'm
getting more and more frustrated because
arousal means I'm putting in more and
more effort but I'm not getting my goal
so this is experience very aversive Lee
it leads to what blue-ber called an i it
relationship with everything your
motivation here is largely curiosity you
got a gap and you're trying to fill it
in and notice if I prolonged curiosity
that's aversive to you you don't like it
if curiosity gets extended too long like
if you if you were watching a leading a
mystery novel or watching a mystery and
they kept and you never found out who
did it
that's awful right that's horrible now
this is adaptive you need this there's
nothing wrong with this mode but it's
very different from what he calls the
being mode maybe it should have been
because he should have called it the
becoming mode this is the mode that is
has to do with your developmental needs
you need to become you need to become
mature you need to become honest you
need to be in love all right these are
not homeostatic needs these are called
autopoietic needs these are needs
basically how you're making yourself and
making yourself have them have more
meaning in life these are very important
needs to you so here when you're in this
mode
you're doing something for its own sake
arousal is actually very positive so if
you'll allow me when you're having sex
right more arousal is good right and
it's positive or you're engaged in doing
an activity you really enjoy arousal
goes up and pleasure goes up at the same
time it's a very different mode because
what you're trying to do there is engage
in growth rather than return to a
homeostatic baseline so you tend to
relate to things in what Buber called an
eigth our relationship let me show you
what I mean okay remember how I related
to the cup you know reminds me of all
the other cops the water reminds me of
all the other water water now I'm
entering in I'm in a fantastic
relationship with a wonderful woman love
of my life right if I said to her if I
came to her and I said my love I'm with
you because you remind me of all the
other women I've ever been with
and therefore I know that I can easily
control and consume you as I need to
solve my problems relationships is not
going well
instead I'm entering and I want you to
remember this I'm entering into a
relationship with her whereby she is
helping me grow beyond myself I'm
helping her grow beyond herself and we
are we are bound together in this way
and this tends to be a place where
you're experiencing that curiosity but
wonder notice if I can extend wonder and
it can become more positive it becomes
ah now you can't extend it forever
because then it will become horror
that's why all has these two different
words awesome and awful because it's
right on that cusp do you understand the
two modes okay
so one of the problems we face in our
society is we engage in what's called
modal confusion we try to solve one
kinds of one set of needs but from the
wrong mode what would that look like
well I want to become mature so I buy a
car I want to grow in love so I have
more sex do you see now what happens
with that is I'm trying to satisfy being
needs within the having mode and that
means I ultimately don't satisfy those
needs
I'm very frustrated why is modal
confusion something that gets promoted
in our society well you think about it
the powers that be and I'm not taking
any particular political stance or the
powers that be can manipulate you if
they modally confuse you because they
can get you to buy and consume more and
so Fromm's point was our society has
locked us into a kind of modal confusion
so there's two things I need you to get
from this first of all the idea of an
existential mode remember the eye at the
eye though there's a way in which our
identity and the way we identify things
in the world are bound together it can
be either I adore I thou sow existential
mode that reciprocal binding of identity
and I also the idea that we can get
modally confused so at a very deep level
at that level of our existential mode we
can be deeply confused in a way that is
profoundly
frustrating to us okay so let's let's
develop this a little bit more just
reminding you again about the you know
the idea of the existential mode and in
the book we talk we use the language of
agent and arena like here's a judge in
the court so the judge assumes a
particular agency a particular identity
that fits the arena that the judges in
the court if he went right to a tennis
game dressed like that
tried to act that way right it's not
going well
unless he's supposed to be the judge at
the tennis game but then he'd be in a
different situation etc or there's the
quarterback in the stadium right
assuming a particular agency that fits
that arena so again we are always you're
doing it right now we're always assuming
identities your listener and we're
assigning identities I'm a speaker
you're not really thinking of me too
very much as how I might be a father
okay agent arena coupling now let's take
all of this and go back to the topic of
addiction because I'm fortunate to be
good friends with colleagues with one of
the sort of premier people in the world
for understanding addiction mark Lewis
he was actually an addict himself kicked
his addiction became a world famous
neuroscientist and has worked on
addiction ever since you might want to
read his book memoirs of an addicted
brain so mark basically rejects the
common model we have of addiction which
is the disease model the disease model
is you have a sub a foreign substance in
you and it sort of causes a kind of
biochemical distress that compels you to
consume this drug and of course there's
a biochemical element to most addictions
at least that seems reasonable but mark
proposes that this and I've been out of
conference where I see many people
arguing this this model of addiction
doesn't work anymore because it just
doesn't sit well with the facts for
example most
people spontaneously stop their drug
abuse in their 30s you don't hear about
them why because they don't consume any
of our time and resources you have the
soldiers in Vietnam using opiates heroin
compulsively and they come back the
United States and most of them without
therapeutic intervention stop using
there's lots of evidence like this so
mark points out that there's a much
different story probably going on here
think about the soldier in Vietnam
particular agent in a particular arena
returns back to United States they're
now
no longer a soldier they're a citizen
they're no longer in the war in a
foreign country they're back in their
home do you see it's a it's a big shift
between the agent and Arina relationship
so what mark proposes is we should pay
attention to that existential mode or me
should even make it a verb or coin a
term here that existential moding when
we try to understand addiction here's
his idea so let's say i'm i consume some
alcohol and what that does is it sort of
narrows my cognitive flexibility a bit
my ability to solve problems goes down a
bit yeah now what does that mean that
means that I can't solve as many
problems in the world so now the arena
gets a little bit more narrow for me now
as the arena gets narrow and I there's
less I can but fewer problems I can
solve I actually internalize that and my
cognition narrows a bit more and then as
my cognition narrows a bit more I can
solve fewer problems and you see what's
happening here it's going like this he
calls that reciprocal narrowing my
agency narrows and the arena of the
world narrows until I come to this place
I can't be any other than I am and
there's nothing I can do to change my
world
and that's addiction reciprocal
narrowing
reciprocal narrowing now you see how
addiction is a combination of reciprocal
narrowing and modal confusion because
the person gets locked into this world
and then thinks it's about having a
particular thing so modal confusion and
reciprocal narrowing I was talking to
mark lunch about this and I said mark if
there's a reciprocal narrowing there has
to also be reciprocal opening and he
went oh yes which is nice when somebody
does that about your work all right so I
want to talk to you about a state that
is best understood as reciprocal opening
it's called the state of flow so this
person is rock climbing now rock
climbing if you just talk think about it
objectively sounds like some sort of
people unintelligible it's going to hurt
it's going to cause you pain and
struggle you might fall and kill
yourself and when you get to the top
come back down so why do people do it
why do people do it
well we've talked to them they do it
because they get into the flow state you
might have perhaps been in the flow
State the flow state is a state and when
you feel sort of tremendously at one
with what you're doing you feel deeply
connected to it you feel like you are
sort of stretching yourself because
what's happening in the flow State is
the demands of the situation just exceed
your skill so you have to sort of grow
your cognition right there on and so
you're pouring everything you're pulling
everything of yourself into it and yet
the world is responding very very well
so like I'm a martial artist right if
you're sparring again at the flow state
you it's it feels like grace it's
effortless I don't have to put my arm
here for a block my arm I just find my
arm going there alright so dancers get
into this jazz jazz musicians get into
this you can get into this in all kinds
of ways and what's really significant
about the flow State
is it has that sense of discovery about
it the world seems super salient so you
can imagine athletes they do a lot of
work to try and get into the flow state
because the flow state is optimal it's
optimal experience in two ways it's
optimal in that people rate this as some
of the best experiences of their life
and they don't say that they're having
pleasure they're not having pleasure
and since instead they sense this at one
mint this deep connectedness this
reciprocal opening between them and the
world the world is opening up they are
opening up and it's coupled together and
it's at one but it's also optimal
performance this is where people do
their very best now what's really
interesting for our talk is that flow
experiences are correlated with meaning
in life how many of you think you've had
a flow experience put up your hand good
the rest of you should do more to get
into flow because it's predictive of how
meaningful you rate your life if you get
into the flow state more often you will
say that your life is more meaningful
which is kind of odd because we tend to
think of meaning as all meaning of life
must be in terms of all the beliefs I
accumulate but no it's more about this
flowing connectedness ok reciprocal
opening connectedness meaning in life
okay so there's a few other things I
won't go through all of this
a couple things just quickly to note we
talked about the virtual Exodus the fact
that people more and more are stating
that they prefer the virtual world the
world of video games rather than the
real world so you get books entitled the
virtual Exodus or another book entitled
reality is broken and ask yourself why
do people want to go in to these virtual
worlds why do they prefer them well one
of the things that video games reliably
produces the flow state they reliably
produce the flow state they're one of
the best ways of inducing flow which
makes them dangerous
the w-h-o is considering making
Gaming addiction a real thing now what
else is going on in there we'll think
about all this connectedness they have
they're not acquiring any beliefs about
the world but what do they have well
they're in a world that makes sense to
them that is coherent everything is
connected and they know the rules
there's a narrative to which they are
connected to which they matter to which
they make a difference that gives
everything a direction and they know how
to self transcend they know how to
satisfy the being needs of growth and
self transcendence because they level up
what they're hungry for that they get
satisfied it's only an earth
satisfaction in the video games is what
they find lacking in the real world now
there's some more positive news we talk
about new forms of symbolic play which
we call serious play you also have a lot
of positive signs of responses to the
meeting crisis you have the mindfulness
revolution going on you have the revival
of ancient wisdom practices stoicism is
going through a huge revival right now I
spoke at stoic on X last year than a
speaker yet still on this year also all
these things are also people are not
just reacting or responding
some people are reflectively responding
to the this sense of disconnection that
is becoming pervasive in our society so
what is meaning in the meaning crisis
what are we talking about first of all
we're using meaning as and as a metaphor
meaning properly applies to sentences
and so you know there's jokes about that
well you know what's the meaning of life
Oh 42 or something like that right so
the idea is there's sentences have this
kind of they have a coherence that fits
me and the world together when I say
something true whatever true is so
there's the idea that there's a pattern
in sentences
that connects me to reality so what
would the metaphor be there's a pattern
a way of living that connects me to
reality and but it's not it's not
semantic meaning it's not the property
of sentences it's a pattern in how I'm
living my life it's a pattern in how I'm
connected to the world that's called
meaning in life so many researchers
myself included we make a distinction
between the meaning of life and meaning
in life you'll notice both one's a
philosophy text by Susan wolf the others
a psychology anthology by Hicks meaning
in life is what I'm talking about I'm
talking about what people are pointing
to when they judge whether or not their
lives are meaningful when people talk
about meaning the meaning the meaning of
life and you have to say it's sort of
sadness ownerís what's the meaning of
life right they generally mean some sort
of cosmic or metaphysical purpose or
destiny I don't talk about that that's
not my purview it seems pretty clear
that that's not what people are talking
about when they're talking about meaning
in life so I'm talking about meaning in
life because that's the meaning that's
at risk in the meaning crisis okay so
we've seen that this meaning has a lot
to do with a fording agency that is
fitted to an arena in the proper way we
see that right it can have a deep kind
of spiritual significance for people now
what we need is a way of drawing this
all together the way in which this
connectedness can be significant affords
the existential modes agent arena fitted
this together making a kind of coherence
of the world the kind of thing that the
people going into the video games are
seeking so I want to turn to the
cognitive science and I want to try and
get at something a meaning that
explicate s' integrates and helps to
explain all these features and what I
want to propose to you is that we can
draw together making sense a Janina fit
intelligibility and deep significance
with a particular proposal that's at the
heart of my
this is the idea that this kind of
meaning the meaning that's in the
meaning in life is relevance realization
okay so all of that what I just talked
about you know solving problems goals
intelligibility all of this making sense
all of this comes together in the notion
of intelligence a very fraught notion no
doubt but I want to talk about how we
actually study and test for intelligence
we study and test for intelligence by
giving people problems and so I want to
take a look at the cognitive science of
intelligence as a way this sounds like
it won't connect but it will as a way of
trying to get deeper into the cognitive
machinery that's going on in the way the
kind of meaning we're making when we're
making meaning in life okay so first of
all let's consider a contrast what kind
of problem solver you are okay so whose
two problem solvers here's a vending
machine this is a special-purpose
machine it can sort of solve a very
limited set of problems in a very
limited domain and here's a girl and
she's a general problem solver I I like
this slide because I don't quite know
what's going on here she's talking to
her classmates the teacher is writing
some sort of math equations and then to
the left of her as the word God so I
don't quite know what's going on there
but it points to something really
important about you you are a general
salt problem solver you can solve a wide
variety of problems in a wide variety of
domains you can learn how to swim
you can learn how to play tennis you can
learn how to do math you can learn how
to talk about God you can learn to
engage in a conversation you can learn
origami you are a general problem solver
so one of the ways of trying to
understand intelligence is in terms of
being a general problem solver in fact
the project in AI is moving from just
making AI to making a GI artificial
general intelligence because that is the
kind of intelligence that you and I have
and it's the kind of intelligence that
the machines so far don't have
okay so let's take a look at being a
problem solver okay so a problem is
defined by some representation of the
goal state right and some initial state
that's different from a goal state let
me give you an example here's my initial
state I'm thirsty
my goal state is to be by the water and
then there's a bunch of things I can do
operators I can raise my left hand raise
my right hand sing oh right there's a
bunch of things I can do right and that
I want to put those things I can do
together in a sequence that will
transform the initial state into the
goal State well domain what are called
path constraints but what are path
constraints well you don't want to solve
any one problem to the exclusion of
solving your other problems if I want to
cook my lunch it's not a good idea to
burn down my house to do so you wouldn't
go brilliant brilliant
right you'd say wow you're stupid
because although you cooked your lunch
you now have created a whole bunch of
other problems for yourself that you
didn't have before okay so a problem
solution transforms an initial state
into the goal State
well obeying the path constraints a
problem solving technique is any method
for finding such a problem solution
intelligence is to have a bunch of a
capacity for generating problem-solving
techniques let's go through this
step-by-step now so there's the goal
state having my water here's my initial
state I don't have water right and then
I do I could do one of three things for
example and then so on and so forth this
is called a search space or a problem
space this lays out all the potential
pathways between the initial state and
the goal state this is what you actually
have to do when you're trying to make
artificial intelligence figure out what
the problem space is and how you're
going to move through it because what
intelligence is is to search through
that space and to find a path that takes
the initial state to the goal State
now the problem with this diagram is you
have a God's eye view of it you can see
it all at once but in real life you're
at the green dot looking this way and
you don't know what combination of
actions is going to solve your problem
and you say okay so what well let's take
a look at this let's calculate how big
that search space is so it's F to the D
F is the number of options available to
you at any one step and D is the number
of steps you take is that okay so on
average right in a chess game on on
average for each turn there are 30 moves
you could do and on average there's 60
turns so the number of alternative
pathways you have to check is 30 to the
power 60 which is 4 point 2 3 9 times 10
to the 88th now that's a very big number
yes this is called combinatorial
explosion
it's called combinatorial explosion just
to give you some comparisons because
people will say things are but my brain
is very complex and there's lots of
neurons
I've watched science shows yes you have
but you have a look 10 to the 10 neurons
which is nowhere near 10 to the 88th you
said but it's not the neurons it's the
number of connections
that's very good you're right the number
of connections is 5 times 10 to the 14th
that's a big number
you know what it's nowhere near 10 to
the 88th nowhere near so do you see what
this is what this is showing you can't
calculate your way through this all
right so one of the things that
fascinates me is and most researchers
and is how do you avoid common tutorial
explosion because that's not what
happens to you you're not over here the
water is there in the Oh No
that's not what happens somehow and this
is what you can't do you can't check the
whole space it's too big even if you
used all of your brains and all all of
your brain and all of the connections in
your brain they're dwarfed by that
search space so that's not what you do
you can't check the whole space and this
is what you do and this is what
fascinates me you huh somehow don't it
sounds like a Zenko hen you
intelligently ignore most of the space
you intelligently ignore it you zero in
on the relative relevant information and
you do it like that and you know what
we're having you know what we don't know
how to do yet it's good machines that
ability how do you Siro and on the
relevant information and how do you do
it like that can you do it perfectly of
course not I'm gonna show you you can
get messed up but here's the thing you
do it well enough that you're a general
problem solver so New Orleans Simon who
came up with this whole search space
thing they tried to answer how do we
avoid common audit or explosion they
don't have in my opinion and most
people's opinions they don't have a
complete answer but they say something
really important they make a distinction
and this word has slipped around in
common culture but I'm gonna use it the
way they used it they made a distinction
between an algorithm and a heuristic an
algorithm is a problem-solving technique
that is guaranteed to find a solution
for example there is a algorithm for
determining the number of people in this
room I count them I count them okay some
algorithms work because for some
problems the problem space is not very
large okay but as I tried to show you
for many problems the problem space is
combinatorial explosive so they said
what we use is we use heuristics okay
because this is their argument if you
were to use algorithmic processes how
much of the search space that you have
to search in order to guarantee to find
a solution or prove that one's
impossible how much of it you have to
search all of it if you use an algorithm
that works in terms of certainty then in
order to be certain that you found the
path you have to search all of the space
and that's combinatorial explosive
that's cognitive suicide now here's
something I need you to think about
right away logic and math are
algorithmic
you can't logic and math your way
through most of your problems
relevance realization is deeper than
logic and math only after relevance
realization has crunched the problem
space down can you then apply logic and
math so instead we use heuristics what
the heuristics do well their heuristics
right it's a problem-solving method that
tries to pre specify where you should
look in the problem space right it
Orient's you it sort of gives you a rule
for ignoring most of the search space
the problem space it pre specifies what
part of the search space you could look
for so here's some heuristics for
playing chess get your queen out early
castle control the center board the
problem with that is I can do all of
that and still lose and what's
interesting is how the heuristic works
it biases my attention it makes me think
of the word pre-specify it makes me
prejudge what's going to be relevant it
prejudices me I was playing chess not
that long ago with somebody and they
were controlling the center board their
attention was biased that way so I
played a peripheral game and beat them
ok so when you're using you have to use
heuristics you can't use algorithms you
have to use heuristics heuristics make
you a general problem solver because
they help you do relevance realization
but whenever this is formal proof for
this called the no free lunch theorem
whenever you use a heuristic you're
always risking bias let's do it ok so
you take your loved one to the airport
we've all done this right let's notice
our behavior here we do all these things
that are euphemisms for don't die have a
safe trip like that's going to do
anything text me when you get there
because if the plane starts to crash the
person can stand up and say wait I have
to text and the plane goes
right okay so it's all euphemisms for
don't die well what's going on here well
we're trying to judge the probability of
an event now if I try to algorithmically
calculate the probability of world real
world events
that's combinatorially explosive I can't
do it so are you we humans use two
heuristics we use the availability
heuristic and the representativeness
heuristic the availability heuristic
says if I can easily remember or imagine
an event it's highly probable and of
course I can easily my Homo erectus
brain can easily imagine all that metal
fall it oh yeah that's easy
what's the representativeness heuristic
the representativeness heuristic is the
more prototypical or salient and event
is the more probable we think it is so
when planes crash they're called
disasters and tragedies they're highly
representative it also makes it easy to
remember
that's also the availability heuristic
see the two heuristics working with each
other so you can easily remember and
imagine this very prototypical event so
it must be highly probable it must be
highly probable then your loved one get
leaves goes through security and you go
back and without thinking about it you
enter your car which is the North
American deaf machine airplanes very
safe cars very dangerous
okay I found this on the Internet I said
this at some point and people liked it
so I I think it's good it's kind of
weird I'm sort of approving to myself
which is maybe a little bit too self
congratulate but I I think this is a
good way of putting it intelligence is
about problem-solving rationality is
about trying to overcome the
self-deception that emerges out of your
attempts to solve your problems
see we tend to think of rationality is
all about logic and math ultimately
that's not what rationalities about
rationality is about dealing with the
self-deception that is intrinsic to your
cognition the very processes that make
you intelligent lis adaptive make you
compare comprehensively prone to
self-deception and rationality is about
trying to use your intelligence to learn
strategies for overcoming that
self-deception that emerges when you're
using your intelligence okay what what
what what kind of things help you
overcome self-deception
okay what and I'm still getting that
meaning I'm still so stick with me okay
we want to talk about what's what's
going on what's going on in relevance
realization beyond heuristics in a way
that's relevant to self-deception okay
let's do this quickly together this is
called the mutilated chessboard okay so
you've seen the chess boards before yes
okay so there's eight square there's
eight Bros and eight columns so how many
little squares is there in total
sixty-four you know how to do this they
taught you this in grade four okay so
there's 64 squares 8 by 8 now if I have
a Domino and vertically or horizontally
it will cover two squares you get that
so how many squares do I need to cover
the 64 so how many dominoes do I need to
cover the 64 squares 32 because each
Domino covers two there's 64 squares and
you're saying this is a problem well
this isn't the problem what I'm going to
do is mutilate the chessboard I'm going
to remove those two corner pieces okay
do you see that so how many little
squares are left now on the chessboard
62 can I cover the 62
remaining squares without overhang or
overlap with 31 Domino's you have to
prove your answers correct so many of
you are now staring okay
this was an experiment done in 1990 and
it's been replicated so we know what's
probably going on obviously they're
gonna be individual differences but
here's what many of you are doing you
are formulating this okay what do I mean
by problem formulation problem
formulation is how you are representing
the goals the initial state the
operations you're supposed to perform
and the path constraints that's problem
formulation and how are most of you
formulating this you're formulating this
as a covering problem you're trying to
imagine various configurations of
Domino's covering that board
that's combinatorially explosive
famously there was an engineer trained
in math who formulated this as a prop as
a covering problem worked for it on 18
hours and filled 81 pages of a hill ROI
notebook it's not a good strategy okay
let's do let's reformulate the problem
that's changed the problem formulation
instead of just bashing away at trying
to get the solution remember modal
confusion okay so if I put a domino on a
board horizontally or vertically it will
always cover a block and a white square
do you see that yes
so I need an equal number of black and
white squares in order to apply the
Domino's yes do you notice the color of
the two squares that are removed oh
they're the same color so I do not have
an equal number of black and white
squares therefore it is impossible to
cover the board with the Domino's now
here's what's going to really make you
feel bad about yourself many
participants are minority by the way but
several let's say better came up with
that solution spontaneously notice what
happens here I'm trying to show you how
self-deception works self-deception
isn't lying to yourself you can't lie to
yourself that doesn't make any sense
self-deception is your your attempts to
solve the problem actually bias you in a
way that makes it impossible for you to
achieve your goals and then you have
some reformulations of the problem that
actually breaks that self-deception and
allows you to achieve your goals and it
reconnects you more deeply what's going
on and you know it reconnects you
because you have a flash of insight
that's super salience that connectedness
that oh I see and I'm connected and I
get it and there's it's like this is
what some people are arguing it's micro
flow it's like a little moment of flow
there's another aspect to this most of
the problems I've been giving you are
well-defined problems you know what the
initial state is you know what the goal
state is etc so I take it that's a
well-defined problem for you if 24 times
through 24 times 3 you know that it's a
multiplication problem which gives you a
lot of useful information you know that
the answer should be a number a really
good drawing of a platypus doesn't count
it's the best platypus ever it doesn't
matter if it's that's a solution I know
what operators are completely irrelevant
singing won't help dancing isn't going
to do much but here's the thing although
your education is tended to emphasize
that most real-world problems are
ill-defined problems you don't have a
good representation of the initial state
you don't have a good rep
of the goal state you don't know what
the relevant operators are you're not
sure what the path constraints are here
are some of them participate in
conversation what's the initial State
well you're not saying anything so I say
things porcupine
table Albania well no okay
what's and what what does a good
conversation look are all good
conversations the same no how about
giving a good talk when I started it
what did I have I'm up here in front of
strangers
maybe I'll wave my arms a lot say
anything loudly what look here's my
favorite example of this and I think
I've been in this a couple times in my
life well several I've been in this
stage where I had to do this Cup right
off tin a couple times in my life
go on a successful first date to really
ill defined problem you know it's all
defined because of the advice your
friends give you I'm straight I'm
straight so the invites the advice was
like this look at her eyes but not too
much be funny but not not too funny ask
questions but not too many and then I
realized this is useless advice the only
point of this advice is when no matter
what happens they can tell me later
I told yourself but somehow I'm in a
great relationship now I've succeeded in
this toss see what's missing from an
ill-defined problem is a good problem
formulation do you see what problem
formulation what good problem
formulation is doing it's helping you do
relevance realization zero in on the
relevant information so that you can
solve your problems so here's a
definition insight converts bad problem
formulations into good ones by replacing
a combinatorial explosive search space
with one that is not and or replacing an
ill-defined problem with a well-defined
problem problem formulation is the heart
of relevance realization and you're
doing it right now all the time and
notice what it does for you you came
into this room and all of that relevance
realization
so you knew what the arena was you knew
what your agency should be you should
knew what what operations you're
supposed to perform just happened like
that so I recently published in the
Oxford Handbook of spontaneous thought
with Leo Ferraro and Adrian Harrow
Bennett the argument and the evidence to
support it you know what flow is flow is
an insight cascade it's one in think
about the rock climber
they literally impasse and they have to
reformulate their problems on the fly
they have to have a kind of insight so
that they can keep moving and then they
get stuck again and then they have to
really see the reef aha uh-huh uh-huh
uh-huh
that's what flow is it's a cascade of
insights and extended aha that flash of
insight becomes like a flickering of
flashes like in a movie and you get the
flow state it's deeply deeply connected
that's why you like it so much because
the machinery that's at the core of your
cognitive agency is being put into
perfect sorry wrong word optimal
operation and flow reveals sort of the
deep machinery of relevance realization
in flow your relevance for realization
Machinery is doing excellent
problem-solving right and it's all it's
helping you moment by moment avoid
catastrophic self-deception
this is why people like jazz it gets
them into the flow state because what
jazz is pick up a pattern formulate it
and then break it and reformulate and
then do it for a little bit and then
break it and reformulate break it and
reform it break it reform AHA and as I
mentioned flow is really important
that's one of the things that people get
out of video games when they're seeking
the missing meaning in life okay let's
go back to reciprocal narrowing remember
reciprocal narrowing and addiction yes
okay so this kind of think it happened
to you you have a event that's sort of
emotionally distressing to you and so
your brain immediately strives to
predict what's the probability am I
going to have another event like this
because that's what your brain is it's a
kind of problem-solving prediction
machine and so what it does is it starts
to use all these heuristics it starts to
use the representative heuristic
Wow this really stands out to me this
bad event that just happens who's quite
probable the availability heuristic oh I
can imagine this Oh must be probable
then you get interact with called
encoding specificity you tend to
remember things when you're in the same
state in which you learn them so when
you're sad you tend to remember sad
events and it tends to bias you against
remembering happy events this is help
this helps you plug into context it's
adaptive but you see how it's going
wrong here
so the representativeness heuristic and
the availability heuristic are sort of
reinforcing each other and oh it's quite
probable that I'm gonna do this and then
I'm remembering more and more sad events
because I'm sad and those are
reinforcing each other and then I fall
into what's come from what's called
confirmation bias I tend to only look
for information that confirms my belief
and that increases it so I start to
think oh gee this is gonna be quite
probable this negative event and that
causes anxiety and then when anxiety
does is it really limits it narrows my
cognition and then my world starts
narrowing I see less and less options
and I actually get worse at
problem-solving and it's a
self-fulfilling prophecy and the whole
thing is
back up giving me a sense of the
fatality of the and I spiral into
depression do you see that Leo Ferraro
and I published this in 2013 we call it
parasitic processing notice what's
happening here the dynamic
self-organizing nature of your cognition
because that's what the insight is you
don't do an insight it happens to you
itself organizes the dynamic
self-organizing nature of your cognition
which is so adaptive and all of these
heuristics that are so adaptive work
together to create this complex
maladaptive machine that takes up life
within your mind and sucks life from you
and your attempts to deal with it are
impotent because you will intervene here
or here or here and then like a living
thing it just reorganizes itself and
adapts and you find yourself doing the
same thing again and again and again
so researchers I believe it was at MIT I
did a more we did this two years before
them so yay for me
but that's actually yeah sorry with MSU
and MIT that's actually the diagram but
we're at least on the right track and
they predicted it
that's parasitic processing that's
reciprocal narrowing and modal confusion
taking up route in you and your
cognition in a profound way that you
find deeply compelling why is it
compelling cuz it's making use of all
this adaptive machinery that evolution
has wired you to do do this do this but
it's the very machinery that's also
locking you in into reciprocal narrowing
modal confusion and deep self deception
that disconnects you from the world so
here's the thing we face perennial
problems of self deceptive
self-destructive behavior because of our
human cognition I'm not saying that if
they aren't modified by culture I gave
you an example of capitalism modifying
modal confusion but what I'm saying is
because the very cognitive machinery
that makes this intelligently adaptive
also makes us prone to this we face
perennial problems of self deceptive
destructive disconnection from ourselves
parasitic proton processing and
disconnection from the world because
we're so locked into this comprehensive
pattern of self-deception
so cultures across the world have
created rational in the way I've been
arguing for strategies for intervening
in this but notice what you need you
need not an insight here or there
you need systematic insight that
self-organizing and comprehensive you
need a dynamical system that is as
complex as self-organizing as this but
what it's doing
you need a dynamic a counter active
dynamical system that is doing systemic
insight across all of this and trying to
engender reciprocal opening maybe we can
use rash our intelligence to acquire
rationality and then we can use
rationality to acquire the cognitive
styles that improve insight and flow in
such a way that we can as our gist have
said over calm the self-destructive and
self-deceptive foolishness of parasitic
processing we could have rational
insight insightful rationality flowing
reason reasonable flow and this would
all enhance your ability to deal with
ill-defined problems and zero in on
relevant information connect to what
really matters I would propose to you
that that's wisdom and here's the thing
cultures have created wisdom practices
wisdom institutions wisdom traditions
ecologies of practices not just a single
intervention or single practice but
wholes systematic living systems of
practices and transformation to deal
with this and I do this with my students
I say where do you go for information
the internet where do you go for
knowledge science and the University and
where do you go for wisdom and there's
silence
there's silence you know what they try
to do they can't not do this so they
Auto didactically in a fragmented
fashion and we know this from studying
the nuns and no NES this is the group of
people who don't belong to any
established religion they cobble
together in an autodidactic fragmentary
fashion sets of practices trying to deal
with all of this and like all
autodidactic fragmentary strategies
they're loaded in with bias and
self-deception so they're modally
confused in a deep way the very
processes they're using to try and deal
with this
octi tend to frustrate them more
profoundly so I want to show you a
little bit more very quickly about
relevance realization well as I've tried
to show you relevance realization is not
cold calculation relevance realization
is the ongoing commitment of your
precious time and resources to dealing
with your deepest existential moding and
dealing with the most profound
proclivities you have towards
self-deception it is one of deep caring
that is how you care we Atlantic you
said the difference between us and
computers is we have to care about the
information we're processing because we
have to take care of ourselves ok it's
not only evolving but in it involving
I'm constantly projecting a salience
landscape what's standing out to me is
relevant and then I bind myself to it
and then I reach ange it and that agent
arena relationship is looping all the
time something being relevant is not a
subjective feature of my mind because if
I don't find the right things relevant I
don't solve my problems but it's not an
objective feature of the world because
nothing is objectively relevant because
things are relevant one minute and
irrelevant the next your left big toe
now it's relevant to you but it doesn't
stay relevant to you all day long
because that's weird and distracting
it's about the connectedness relevance
realization is how you are bound never
flow is how you're connected dynamically
coupled to the world its trans Jack
nor objective it's about the
connectedness between them that grounds
both of them the relevance realization
connectedness grounds and makes possible
the agent and the arena and the
relationship between them it's
pre-conceptual before I can conceive or
categorize anything I have to zero in on
the relevant information and bind myself
to it I've already shown you it's pre
logical it's pre experiential if this
isn't running
you're not going to generate meaningful
experience you're not going to have the
agent arena relationship its pre ago ik
the procedure ego and your ego grows out
of it it's pre normative all your
judgments are what's true good and
beautiful depend on you first finding
things relevant relevance realization of
constituent of being an agent in a
meaningful world it is in that sense a
meta meaning system it makes all of our
other meaning systems possible so
Clifford Geertz talked about this in the
interpretation of religion and he said
that religion was such a meta meaning
system religion actually doesn't mean
anything what it does is create the
agent arena fitted nests and all these
practices so that were appropriately
bound so that we belong so that we fit
so that all of our other meaning making
makes sense I'm going to propose to you
the word religio it's one of the
etymological it's one of the candidates
for the etymological origin of the word
religion but I'm reusing religio because
religio means to bind together and all
of this relevance realization and all
the way I've been talking about them
modal right the existential moding the
reciprocal
opening or the reciprocal narrowing
that's all about this buying didn't s
how we're bound to the world bound to
each other bound to ourselves
it's what's lacking when reality is
broken so I think in that sense religio
is a spiritual sense it's a sense of our
Priya going to post egoic binding that
simultaneously grounds their self in the
world it's our deepest grounding of
meaning in life
Gabriel Marcel talks about what he calls
ontological mystery a mystery isn't a
problem a mystery is when you try to
confront something and you put a problem
framing around it but the problem
framing itself becomes problematic right
and then you just expand you go into a
state of awe relevance realization has
that kind of form illogical mystery
because you know what you can never
bring into your frame your process of
framing you can never bring the process
of framing itself whenever whatever you
bring in into your awareness is what has
already happened you're not actually
aware of the relevance realization that
is making your current state of mind
possible so a secular wonder the very
ordinary fact that things always matter
in some way or either to us and that we
cannot help but be affected by those
things as if we were immersed in a sort
of bubble of meaningfulness or better in
an atmosphere of significance and import
that we do not create from scratch but
are absorbed by the metaphor of the
atmosphere should suggest not on the
image of a global container but also
that of a rhythm of breathing the
opening and the narrowing and a flight
refraction the zeroing in on relevance
to which a living being must attune or
adjust herself alright
the xperia
having the world has its roots not in
the head on and focused relationship
with a clear-cut object but in the
emergence of a bubble of significance
that for a sentient being planes the
same role as played by the atmosphere
regard to the earth it creates that is
special conditions of life where
existentially crucial distinctions
between insight inside and outside are
drawn he then goes on that that
atmospheric nature of the bubble of
significance means we don't we're not
aware of it as a focal object and
they're aware of us we're in fact we're
aware of it right in non-focal states
such as Wonder and awe I would also add
horror right an absurdity so your
experience of the machinery of relevance
realization it's deeply spiritual I
propose that human spirituality as
opposed to full-blown religion is about
preserving and enhancing making more
adaptively insightful your relevance
realization machinery because it's so
fundamental to your agency to your
meaning in life and this is not
primarily expressible by beliefs because
it's happening below the level of
concepts and logic and propositions in a
knot and non-focal things that you
become non focally aware like Wonder and
flow so here's my final thing and then
we'll end that that wonder flow of
religio all the practices we do to
accentuate and accelerate religio our
sense of religio needs to be implemented
with wisdom I
this is how we should try and understand
the project of religion in the 21st
century
religion is a systematic set of
practices for inducing the wise wonder
flow of religio thank you very much for
your time and attention
you