hi my name is ed Mulder and I don't have
an actual project but I have an idea
which is actually what this is about
on brainstorming brainstorming so right
now
project raising is becoming a place
where people who have projects under way
aim B and are thus into what I call the
B sphere I got that off at Twitter a few
days ago have a place to you know
present their projects and then then we
have a collective intelligence
you know emerging here that can review
those projects and get feedback and you
know hopefully down the line can
actually do the raising part you know
and then we have projects that are
emerging directly from game B who that
are actual projects but what I noticed
we don't have is something for people
who have maybe an idea or you know they
don't know if that idea is viable they
don't know if it makes sense and they
can be context or affiliated context and
they don't know how to proceed so my my
suggestion is that either project
raising expands to encompass that type
of functionality or it becomes a
separate project affiliated with project
raising so actually the way I would like
to proceed today is to actually go into
that mode that I'm describing and apply
it to this idea itself so I'm interested
to hear what anybody else here has to
say right now about that I
I think that's great idea Sora will
liked the idea brainstorming and
brainstorming and and and I like the
idea of including brainstorming as part
of this and even even I wonderful if it
would be wise to even take a further
step back in the process and say someone
can come to us with a problem like and
maybe that's what you mean also like
they say oh I want to solve world hunger
let's let's raise that up in brainstorm
over that problem is that kind of what
you're thinking yeah
actually actually that adds to what I
they gain so it's not just an idea
you know there's problems and you know
what kind of ideas and projects could we
you know form in that problem solution
space yeah I I think that's definitely
good well and I'm reminded of some of
the stuff that I've watched from Bonita
Roy and it may be listen come from her
specifically but the idea that
ultimately what you want to when you
bring a group together for collective
intelligence what you're gonna come away
with is an idea that doesn't look
anything like any of the ideas that any
one individual person came in with and
you know I love that people are coming
in with their set with it with these
really grand visions and these amazing
ideas and I've also seen it's like well
I have that you know how attached are we
to this vision and to how it's going to
look and coming in and going okay I know
I want to be part of this process I know
I want to help but I don't have a I
don't have a sense of how my skills can
fit into this overall picture and so
figuring out kind of like okay how can I
contribute my skills to this thing that
I want to see developed right yeah I
like that too because in the game a
world and I don't know if this will
always be exclusive to game a I'm sure
will apply to game B
but like you go into a job and they're
looking for certain skills and you know
you try to determine whether you have
those skills but what about the
situation where the project itself
doesn't isn't quite aware of what skills
will be needed you know so there's not
this this already determined criteria
for who can participate you can't I
think just that like being able to come
to a space and brainstorm with people
you don't need your skill set set out
it's super powerful to have it set out
so is in the future you can like it
could be something you Grady right like
I need to figure out my skill set is so
I know where I'm I'm going or you can
just show up to conversations and apply
who you are and what you know which is
your skill set and then through that
find out oh you're really great at this
at this process and yeah just having a
space to have these conversations and
and then the tools to empower them well
and I just want to Jubilee I really
appreciated that and I want to bring up
like as I was sharing what I just shared
I was noticing like wait this voice in
my head saying well you can't say come
in there not knowing what your skill set
is you're supposed to know what your
skill set is and like and and seeing how
that influenced what I was saying as I
was saying it because I had this idea of
what I thought I needed to be in that
moment and so like especially in this
place of brainstorming brainstorming
it's like it's a vulnerable place to be
it's like it's coming in and saying I
don't know and that's a we're not
supposed to be in that like in game a
you're not supposed to say I don't know
you're supposed to have the answers
you're supposed to you know like be the
expert and coming in and going yeah
here I want to participate
I I would also like to add to that that
often times we have skills and skill
sets that we're not even aware of
because you know we all have life
experienced over a broad range of
different types of events and
experiences and everything and if you
put those together sometimes you know
from the most unlikely places what
you'll discover is that hey I have
skills that I didn't even know I had and
I wouldn't have figured that out but
suddenly I'm hearing something about
this project that you know ignites
something in my head and boom puts them
together suddenly I realized that I
actually have a skill set I wasn't aware
of and also just add to that also
sometimes just having I'm sure people
have a willingness to learn new skills
needed by the project cause if you're
passionate about that I do software
development but I've been learning a lot
about marketing so that people will use
my stuff so very similar thing I think I
think I think if people are open to that
then that would be great like you don't
know what your skill set is a lot of
times because it's almost like you have
to compare yourself to other people and
because you have to know everything in
game a there's this like certain amount
of facade you have to put on that you
know everything and even in even with
yourself and so you assume everything
you're good at everyone's good at and so
you don't see the beauty and what you
have to offer and the things that are
hard for you you're hiding right it's
late so you can't have someone else
offer that to you and you can't see the
beauty in that combination in like you
are exactly your skill set is you like
that you bring what is easy for you and
when it's hard and what you're willing
to take on like that lay set right like
if something your marketing and you know
you're not going to marketing you're the
best one at the table or you're the one
willing to take it on at the table then
you're more empowered to do that and
then that process like that feels
vulnerable but if you're matched with
someone who has more marketing
experience
and they're able to walk you through
that process even if they're not on the
project itself right or not in that
brainstorming is basic there's so much
that can happen when you show up and and
admit what you know know and allow it to
emerge
I think Jamie will and Steven Kotler
wrote the book stealing fire and and in
there they talk about how Navy SEAL
Teams operate and it's kind of similar
to what you were saying you know who's
who's ever I'm not sure how to word this
but who's ever in the right place at the
moment with the you know with the
knowledge of what needs to be done or
skill it needs to be done that's the
person who steps in and takes leadership
at that point yeah that's really good
I wonder if we'd want to start putting a
little structure around this
conversation but let me know if it's too
early for that I just was wondering how
do we invite this concept into this
space is it as simple as I mean do we
need to do something as big as changing
the name or does project raising still
kind of fit which is that our name for
the student layout if so many names
flying yes yes project crazy is which I
think still kind of fits that but maybe
a little if we could workshop a blurb
then that jubblies been putting out the
announcements but she's not tagged with
having to do that all in the future but
some kind of language that would
communicate the openness that the ideas
the projects that we're raising don't
have to be fully formed and they don't
even have to be a solution yet it could
just be a problem does anyone have any
thoughts on that
I think that's a great idea I think
maybe what what I was thinking was maybe
you know most most of these Saturday
night or Saturday morning sessions here
are around projects because there's a
lot of projects but maybe you know every
few weeks set aside one for a problem or
I actually the more I think about right
now the more I like the idea of coming
at this for problems you know because
people might have an idea but - if they
could associate that was a specific
problem or problem set that would be
really good yeah and kind of maybe a
term like an open-mike although that
might imply that they could also bring
their projects which it wouldn't be a
bit appropriate time for that if it's
not related to the other discussions and
I don't know if we want to start off
with the problem or just have it be
completely open mic and people can bring
up problems with it brainstorm however
many there are and and just go with the
flow what could submit problems ahead of
time and we could vote on them to see
which one generates like that's what I
want that's what I have and I want to
talk about right and so therefore you
know not necessarily like this is the
space where I like the idea of not
having the problem ahead of time is you
feel like you need to be an expert in
that problem to show up and talk about
it
when you don't you just need to be it to
be an intriguing problem to you right
that that you want to be able to offer
your opinion on it as opposed to like
food scarcity let's talk about food
scarcity
do you eat you know like that is the
level of what you where you need to be
to contribute not you need to be a you
know farmer or a you know have an
agricultural background like you need to
just show up are you interested do you
want to talk about food scarcity right
yeah I think I think to what I'm
envisioning is that
there's a way via software or some kind
of platform where we can you know
surface basically you know people skills
resources so that say you know we can
start realizing where all these things
connect you know even even within
projects or might be projects that
there's this project solving this
problem and this project solving this
problem but there's certain certain
solutions or methods or something that
this project is discovered that are
applicable to this project so you know a
kind of cross-pollination but the
ability to get resources and people
where they're needed when they're needed
one of the what came to mind it was it
for me as we were talking about that is
you know tying back to what Jubilee said
about maybe not even knowing what your
skill set is and there again that that
the game a mentality of what I'm going
to present as though I know something
even though I you know I'm gonna present
it as an expert and I'm gonna hide the
things that I don't know how to how do
you create more of a feedback loop with
those things you know it's there's I
have a few people that I'm that I'm
comfortable with that know me really
well and they know some of my skills but
they they also have a set image of you
know an idea in their head of Who I am
and so other new people who I don't know
very well they might see something in me
that the people that I you know that
love me like they know that when you
when you're really close to somebody
they know you really well but it is this
but that's a vulnerable thing to do
is to open yourself up to wait this
person is going to give them feedback
but that's that's uncomfortable I don't
want to necessarily let them see and and
so Edward to tie that in like how you
know like how could we create you know
that a feedback loop of that information
and in order to like get a sense of oh
yeah this has this set of skills and you
know there are some people who are
really good at connecting that tends to
be something that I like to do is like I
will fight I will like okay I know you
and I know what you're interested in and
I want to connect you with this other
person because I think that you guys
would you know there there's something
you guys have in common or an interest
but how to make that more of an explicit
thing something that people are that
we're trying to do even more consciously
I think it might help to put I got
framework around maybe a certain in
session so keep it open like a storming
about a storming but put one session in
a frame of like we'll be talking about a
variety or ideas but in the context of
marketing in the game be space and then
ideally find at least one person who we
know is fairly qualified and you know
knows about that topic to attend and
then the goal is that other people speak
up if you think that you might enjoy
that if you you know are interested in
EE in marketing you show up the goal is
that the expert talks as little as
possible helps frame the conversation
and sort of helps you know avoid any
pitfalls and in the end if you felt like
oh I actually participated in that
conversation my decent to be welcome
maybe I'm okay at marketing yeah
something else that came to mind like
that idea of having like an expert there
to guide it was to like every project
kind of needs there's a certain core
group of people it needs right like it
needs the marketer it needs it needs
certain pieces the finance person maybe
and if someone's willing to take on that
role for that project even if it's not
going to have far
how forward is it gonna go right like
clearly that's not in the idea phase but
like I said they're matched with like a
person who knows who knows marketing but
also like a group of people who's
learning it right like a group of people
who are like hey we're taking on
marketing for our own individual
projects and we're median marketing
circles so that we can further our
marketing skills if that's something we
want to take on right so like sort of
break off sessions for the people who
are in the interested sphere to like
talk about it more than once a week yeah
like like I mean are we brainstorming
right now what this space looks like for
for project because yeah that would be a
little outside of this scope but if
there was technology underlining it
right then we'd like you know you just
need to schedule the marketing session
and so there could be several throughout
the week or one throughout the week that
and that's part of the schedule eight to
whatever I guess in my view that's less
about this particular session we can
figure out how it fits in and it's more
just about what does it look like
getting people to explore and sort of
understand that oh I'm actually good at
this I you know participated in that
conversation maybe it was around like
development and I really wasn't good so
I'll steer away from that or maybe watch
a few more and see if I missed something
I think in the end I ideally you'll end
up with a bunch of people who are
exploring new interests and you
definitely want a decent like so you
know selection of choices for them to go
out and actively participate in these
other sessions knowing that like
something a lot like marketing I will
end up being interesting to a lot of
people especially it like with the kind
of up audience that were the kind of
people in this session right now
and you'd want them to actually be able
to go out and have a bunch of
conversations that ends up being twenty
people who think grow out that maybe I'm
interested in marketing there's you know
in gaeme when like you choose to be the
orc or the you know rogue or whatever
and and then when you're putting your
team together you also need a certain
number of people you can't be all
patrols you can't be all and so
is like I know which piece is on
absolutely horrible at I know which
piece is I'm learning at I don't know
and like to be able to put a team
together not the team right this isn't
necessarily bringing it through but like
I want to brainstorm this idea and at
this point I need this panel of people
and then it like draws them draws them
in right kind of way too techie and like
algorithm and stuff but like that'd be
cool something I've been thinking about
asking in the game be space but I'm not
sure even had a really structured the
question to have it be participate about
is just what does everyone feel like
their skill sets are so that we can
start to see like oh that person's
actually says that they're good at
finance okay prepare for a lot of emails
and whereas if somebody thinks that
they're good in the product space I
imagine that's gonna be most of the
people starting like projects like this
is they're coming at it from sort of a
product view and then there's probably
at least one of their skilled bolted on
whether it's being a developer or a
marketer or that kind of thing but to
know okay there's a bunch of people who
are sort of product type people who are
looking for help in this oh I have that
skill set I can go and shop around and
see what projects I wanna join the one
phrase that keeps coming up and you know
in the in the tech space there's the
concept of a product owner they're not
the part you know they don't necessarily
have the tech skills of the marketing
skills or the you know but they are the
owner of the thing that that that you're
trying to move forward so it's like okay
something says something is not
installed so let's you know kind of pull
people together and there's the and so
you know but again they don't they might
not have you know their expertise might
simply be in corralling people that are
needed to move a project forward and
there's because within that there's you
know that one of the one of the skills
that I'm that I know I'm good at is like
I'm really good at
in space for somebody who's struggling
with stuff like that's something I know
but I don't know where that you know
fits in in the context of everything
that's happening and yet and so like and
what I hear a lot of within within this
conversation is like a lot of the
technical stuff but there's also the
people skit you know there's the the
people aspect of it and how that
includes included within the within that
space and there's and I think you know
again there's less how do you you know I
tend to be somebody who I sort of relish
going in in and being like vulnerable
I'm okay with that I'm okay with
exposing myself in that way but not
everybody is in fact most people are not
comfortable with that and so how to
create a space where like it's okay if
you come in and you don't have any idea
what you're talking about and you say
something that's not even you know that
and and you can raise your hand
tentatively and go well I thought maybe
about this like how to encourage that
space with vulnerability that because
yeah what's yeah it's kind of like a
space it's where it's safe to fail um
where you you know think I'm gonna try
this and it's a safe place you know it's
not going to impact the overall goals of
the project in a negative way like we
learn to think with game a um you know
you you don't hire people and see if
they're gonna have the skills or whatnot
but instead to be able to create a space
where people feel comfortable going into
that space and and trying it out you
know and if it's not for them then
that's fine
but in order to create that space you
need the people skills that you're
talking about again I'm right you know I
come from a tech background and again
I'm reminded of like a sandbox
in all that we're goin and you can you
know you can you screw things up break
things try you know try things out and
often you know my husband he he'll go
into an organization and he'll that
they'll be like okay here here's the
sandbox and people are like wait a
minute like I didn't know what to do it
like a place to play to try things out
you to I love I am I love the phrase
there is no failure only feedback
because so much of game a is you know
you've been conditioned that if you
failed you you know we failed whereas
it's let's try something let's serve
something at the wall and see what
sticks and encourage that sense of play
and you know the and I'm reminded of
John for Vicki one of the things he said
is play is sacred and how do you
encourage that play with ideas and that
is like that is something that it took
me like falling flat on my face and life
to go oh wait a minute
I can actually try things and I don't
have to know the answers like I was
terrified to try anything until I fell
flat on my face and it's like okay well
that didn't work so let's pick ourselves
up and try again
oh but it's but for people who have not
fallen flat on their face and had life
you know kind of hand them you know I'm
skipping ideas there's a meme going
around that says if you're part of if
you're part of game being you haven't
had an existential crisis then you're
then you're having a problem that's kind
of like to get in this place you have to
have experienced that existence of
crisis
that's like alright well let's just try
 see what happens
and I think part of the solution is
finding the people that aren't there yet
and asking what they need right like
what because I'm the same mostly there's
areas I'm not comfortable falling on my
face and in other areas or I'm like you
don't even know what life is handed me
you know got anything to hand me that I
can't handle yes but to and the irony of
like the more you go through the less
competent you look and the more
competent you are like it's this like
but you have to get there first and so
what do people need to be able to show
up and be in that sandbox when life
hasn't when we are a very big shame
culture and you have to know everything
partly it's us showing up and showcasing
we're gonna mess it up we're gonna get
it wrong you're gonna get it right we're
gonna we're gonna showcase that there is
no failure there's only feedback and you
get to keep showing up you know like and
we keep showing up well and I think what
you know part of that is like continue
continuing to show up on a regular basis
like a a group of people who are willing
to go through this process publicly and
because now Jubilee you and I have met
several times and I'm sure that there
will come you know I am NOT somebody who
is comfortable pushing back and so like
but there but the more safe I feel with
other people then it's I reach that pay
that place of oh wait a minute
I disagree with you and you know and and
maybe it'll you know and as you get more
comfortable you get more it starts to
feel a little bit more safe to have
disagreements and to like right now it
seems like there's still a lot of you
know some people are cut more
comfortable with with that disagreement
but there still seems it's like okay
we're still in that we're still in that
polite face and getting you know and you
know so continuing to do it in a play in
a way that is like okay let's get to
that place where we don't we where
there's where conflict can come to the
surface and we can see that conflict
isn't a bad thing so I think so much of
game a like it's interesting there's war
and then there's we avoid conflict and
like how to have conflict and it not be
then that's catastrophic yeah I think
would you bring conflict together with
like rule Omega and respect you know um
that the conflict is not actual conflict
it's it becomes as feedback process I
think the word I'm to say more than
conflict was tension tension yeah I'm
just gonna put humans comments up here
because I think it's it's pertinent
yahoos trauma has to be acknowledged and
accepted as a stuff Ian and I think that
is we're going to have conflict and
we're gonna show up sometimes
traumatized and allowing for that to
happen and then also allowing for the
repair and growth right like what do you
do when you've done something wrong
right like when you get overheated and
yell at someone or like that's a stupid
idea like oh that's there's some trauma
right you know like how to make the
mistakes have the conflict and still
grow still keep showing up on how to you
know one of the skills that I'm still
trying to work on is like okay somebody
it has a trauma trauma trigger and they
come and and they have that response and
how do you then encourage someone to
come back because they're you know so
often we do have that shame culture and
it's like you know my tendency is okay I
did something wrong I'm out I'm gone I
can't I can't even face that and so you
know and I know I'm not the only one who
has that it's like okay things didn't go
right I'm gonna leave that one and try
again somewhere else and that's not like
and so how to like both make the space
for myself to come back in and and like
be in that incredibly vulnerable place
of I screwed up and I want to and I want
to you know make it right or like making
the space for you know it's okay you
know we we understand that the
things happen because of you know that
exact thing of trauma happens and we
want that too you know and that's okay
that's part of this process sounds a bit
like that's just a different kind of
mistake like if we're talking about you
know making a technical or a marketing
mistake there's also a woops I exploded
whoops I don't know how to deal with
this yeah another skill set yes you have
in your your marketers your tech people
and you also have your I don't know your
peacekeeper your your organizer whatever
you'd want to call it in his face where
it's somebody that says okay that wasn't
very constructive let's bring it back
together and figure out where we're at
right now
yeah when when Kara was talking earlier
about how you provide a space for other
people that are going through trouble
stuff I always thought like just to
bring up Star Trek once again the the
ship counselor that they had and wanted
to be interesting to have a project
counselor who's who helps keep that you
know just coach people and also just
build that safe space so interesting
concept doing any project whether it's
you're starting your own business
whether you're going to school it always
brings up all of your trauma and all of
your stuff and you don't really know
that until you've been there and so
acknowledging that and having that space
like and that's also a space where I
feel like people don't know they're
amazing at it and it's not necessarily a
skill set they know they have it's like
if you're a peacekeeper if you're
someone with high emotional and tell
those people in my life I don't know if
they know they're those people like they
do but like not to the degree rum like
come work on a tech project that is so
important right like they don't think
they're like I'm not a coder or I don't
know how to illustrate I don't so like
that's not the space I'm working in it's
like hum be the counselor
the people person well and there's the
you know there's the the person who's
kind of like bringing it back to you
okay yeah trauma is going to happen like
in-game a space there's no there there
really isn't a space for the
acknowledgment of trauma to say okay
when things blow up it
you know you you just kind of like go
into work and you know deal with your
stuff when in reality there's probably
the healing happens in relationship and
like if things go wrong in that
reconciliation you know that's where the
beauty and the gold happens but you know
if you don't have those skills and if
you don't have somebody who's helping
you move through that then it's you know
just ends up blowing up and you know the
image that's popping into my head right
now is there there's a mean that goes
around sometimes that in and I want to
say it's Japan they repair broken bowls
and dishes and stuff with gold so it has
something breaks it becomes more
valuable or with the human bone as the
human bone when the human bone breaks
it's actually stronger afterwards and so
it's the breaking that things actually
become stronger but we don't have that's
not something that I think is is brought
to the surface largely in game a
projects right
yeah it's related to this concept I
think I originally got from John rabe or
somebody but it was basically
operational improvement so you know just
just a very act of of a product or I
think of a child so a child grows and a
child is stressed in certain ways
physically they play they're challenged
and as as they grow they become stronger
they become you know more wise there's
this there's this process of as you're
actually functioning you're becoming
more resilient you're becoming stronger
you know most human constructions at
this point don't have that whether it's
our technology or whether it's you know
our our social structures I mean there's
not really much capacity for improvement
operational improvement I think those
things are very tied together you
in order to create a space where you can
make mistakes transparency has to be
encouraged but then you have to back it
up right with like when people are
transparent and when they show show up
and make mistakes that you don't lump on
shame and you don't don't create I liked
um I've got to find it I think that
everything should become the surface
appreciation to feel part of the whole
that like we can't because we can't see
our skills and strengths have unipaas up
way to like reflect back to people what
they did offer what they do offer in a
space I was part of this school and one
of the things I did which was kind of
from a little places I made this thing
called I remember it was called but I
made like it had those sweets all over
and I put everyone's name on it the idea
was we put like a sweet little note in
it for people if they to encourage that
right to say hey there's something you
can sit sometimes vulnerable to give
that feedback as well and so to be able
to say hey I thought you should have
really well I really liked that idea I
mean I think you'd do it in person a lot
like meaning oh I really love that idea
Kiera right like that's different
and then like also if something comes to
mind after to be like well I really
appreciate when you show up and show
your vulnerability and make mistakes and
give us all permission to do that right
that is huge and it does help a lot too
to know what other people see you as
that's the positive one of the things
that like I don't know that one of the
things I keep I try to try and do
sometimes in conversation is like okay
this feels really vulnerable because
when I do that it gives people the space
you know it lets people know I'm coming
at this and I don't know what I'm doing
I don't but I'm trying to I'm trying
here and there's because there is this
you know bring back to what Edward said
there's this there's this assumption
because we have adult meat suits on that
we're adults and I just don't like you
know we all have the wounded little
parts in us
and you know there's one of my teachers
he's like you know going to work is you
know going to school with a bunch of
kindergarteners who were dressed up and
you know suits and dressed up in suits
and looking like adults and so you know
it's this you know willingness to yeah
say that things are vulnerable I just
want to pause for a second Jonas all
right we haven't heard anything from you
I was just curious if you had anything
to add yeah I was wondering whether I
should take myself as a case study here
for for this kind of conversation and so
from my perspective I'm thinking about
how can I actually move this
conversation forward because I I have
not not much input to all this
vulnerability space but at the same time
I do clearly feel a little bit like if I
now try to interject something and put
me forward but people want to linger on
this one then it is kind of making me in
the way will Naropa that is where just
my thoughts I say just go ahead with
anything because it's going to
metabolize into this greater hole that
we're doing today so I yeah go for it
and if we give you any flack just be
like you just said it was okay to make
mistakes yeah I mean I'm personally I'm
not I don't if I make mistakes
yonis just before you you you may have
mentioned and I bet your microphones a
little bit too close to your mouth so
there's like a little bit of feedback I
didn't want to interrupt you mid mid
part there especially when I was already
being interrupted by Stephanie ruhle but
all right go far sorry
oh now we can't hear you
tried to fix it and we broke it oh no I
think you know I just mentioned it I
yeah at the same time saying this one
I don't feel vulnerable saying these
kind of I don't feel easily hurt or
anything
and so I I don't mind bringing these
kind of things up but I also I don't
want to back
I enjoy natural group dynamics and so I
do enjoy this discussion even though I
don't necessarily feel I have much in
particular to contribute to this area of
it having said all all of this
I do feel personally for me I I would
want to move on to UM two different
things although it's not totally clear
what that one would be um I don't have
any other burning questions in my head I
I would just add that the the safe space
stuff we're talking about just one
aspect of zoom out again and maybe you
know there's there's all kinds of things
to think about here the the platform
aspects I mean yeah one thing that was
sort of occurring to me as we were
talking about this is if we're talking
about you know how do we structure the
conversation around a project overall
part of that is you know the
vulnerability to being able to to to
make mistakes and figuring out your
skill set one of the things that came
out of the first project raising session
I did was I started doing my own
livestream and so now I mean it hasn't
been all that exciting there's no
viewers and it's been just me but one of
the reasons why I was you know sort of
thinking about how to talk to the game
be space about what everyone's skill
sets are or to find people that might be
interested in sort of doing
that split off on my project having a
separate one and kind of forming one of
these groups - for a specific purpose
not it's sort of the the meta purpose of
a project about projects but actually
say hey there's a specific project where
the goal is to meet weekly who wants to
to join in on that where the idea is you
don't have to be an expert if you you
know like marketing and you do some
reading on it and you're sort of in that
space it would be interesting to hear
and then actually give people those
spots to work on those skills and then a
session like this to sort of keep moving
the plan or that framework forward does
that make sense yeah
could we post a link to that at the end
here - it's our - your live stream yeah
I guess I'll be posting it in the the
game be space worker
I should have have done that earlier but
I didn't okay I'm sorry so the the core
notion there was like does that make
sense as one of the thing because I
think the session last week also sounded
like he might have wanted to start doing
his own live stream as well it sounds
like that's gonna be a pretty common
outcome of these types of projects
raising sessions is once you've done
this and you've had that sort of meet up
with a group of people to want to do
that regularly just for a specific
purpose on one particular project as
opposed to this session where it's more
about kind of trying to figure out what
is it like what system what framework
what processes are in place to move any
project forward whereas project agnostic
right so you know we have the big big
space here and then we had I mean
individual projects I guess could be
looked at as kind of like break out
rooms and then with the nose projects
would be other breakout rooms
right and and it'd be great to somehow
be able to link these and keep them like
that exactly and even like Oh possibly
even create like a sign-up list if we
get to the point or say hey here's all
the projects that we talked about and
sort of started that did that discussion
here's the roles that they need here's
you know who's pulling each role and
here's the gaps here's what these
projects still need right right
yes and then you know if you're
interested in dabbling in marketing
great they'll look at the sheet here's
our here's our sessions that where you
can meet with somebody who's a bit more
skilled in marketing to figure out if
that's something you're interested or
skilled at and then if that ends up
being something you're interested in
skill that you can start to look for
actual projects to join those sessions
or do the sort of project project here
right I feel like any of the things that
we are talking about are a little bit in
the space where everything is already
bigger I'm wondering how to get there
like in the very early space like for
example you mentioned that you created a
live stream and no one was there and
Bentley and Jubilee were doing it for
for awhile with only two people how do
we deal with those situations where you
know no one is showing up or only very
few people are showing up and you know
in this situation we don't have this the
luxury of having a peacekeeper or all
kind of different people in different
roles
Oh okay I'll start I think that is one
of the things we're hoping that this
this video session will do is get people
to come that's one person work on our
project and see if there's anyone else
like-minded or at least give them some
promotions I think we're part of the
solution to that but we could probably
brainstorm on other other facilitators
like finding how we get people to
projects supposed to work on it but also
even just for the livestream how do you
get people who actually watch in
comments you can contribute and someone
it's the meta piece right or it's not
someone it is the meta piece it's like
finding a way they create that tool so
we all can have people to come in right
if there's a platform you can bring an
idea to and it's the marketing piece is
super easy cuz it goes out to the people
you know we're gonna be interested based
on your timeline and you just it brings
them right you have five other people to
talk with on screen about the problem
you're having how to move your project
forward or an audience for yours live
streaming and having people come and
participate in that without needing to
go through Facebook and YouTube and
hoping people stumble upon you or
needing to pay marketing and to do to do
all of the ways that we've kind of both
part if you don't know how to have a
Facebook group and you know running
YouTube channel and to be clear my
initial concern wasn't so much that my
last room didn't have any viewers more
so that it didn't have any other it's it
like people like me like people like
sort of hosting and having a
conversation is the first one it was
just me basically going through a
PowerPoint and that's super boring at
this point I'm more concerned about
building up my content and starting to
you know actually hash out ideas I think
if you have an audience and you have a
really compelling sort of story and some
content I think that's what helps build
actually having people watch so that's
more and I think that's very similar to
what we're talking about here is how do
we actually build up that group of
people for these projects how do we
identify what skill sets are needed how
do we actually sort of pair people and
their skills with projects that need
those skills and so on I think
go ahead Kara it's funny as we were
talking about this
sometimes my unconscious my unconscious
had the tendency to talk to me in movies
I don't know why and last yesterday last
night in the last couple days the movie
Field of Dreams has been coming into my
head and the line if you build it they
will come
it has you know and it's like okay let's
let's you know start putting this
structure together and trust that you
know things won't you know that what we
need will come well yeah I just want to
share that that my mind a lot not exact
when you build that they will come and
I'm like I want them to come so we can
build it it's like Franklin well and a
big part of that movie was the faith
like you know and having everyone you
know everyone who knew him going what
are you doing like you're crazy and you
know there there's a certain amount of
faith and like okay let's just you know
if you build it they will come
you know that stuff I was just thinking
about that and often that is in the
startup circles that's thrown out as a
fallacy but I was just thinking about
the movie itself he built it and didn't
the players kind of show up slowly they
didn't they didn't like all up here at
once so it was it was not just in faith
in building it but faith and and staying
with it and and honestly that that won't
always work but it's I it's not a I
don't think it's a fallacy like they say
in the in some communities I think that
yeah I think that that's something to
keep in mind that at least to step out
and give it a try and what will probably
happen is what I think's happened to me
and Jubilee and Polly Adria also is you
know you step out with a project it
fails but you learn and the next one is
a little better and a little bit more
folk or you know it fulfills the need
that the people were interested in and
stuff like that so yeah I think that
faith is a very important piece that may
get lost in game a I think the the
fallacy to your point Bentley the
fallacy is that you know or maybe the
misnomer is they you're gonna build that
what do you build the first time is
going to
right that's good plaque yeah you know
you're gonna build something and you're
gonna get some feedback and you're gonna
get you know and then you know
eventually eventually because you
iterate on it each time yeah or if you
just build it and never tell anybody
yeah but yeah you know you're right that
that is the problem people tend to have
the grand vision which I think both
Jubilee and I did recently and you you
go and you build out everything before
you get that initial feedback right I
think it's important to that that
somehow you know when we fail you know
we can learn that lesson but it's it's
in our heads but somehow to to be able
to take all that information and all
those lessons for failure and be able to
you know put it out there for other
people to learn from too so that if a
project fails it's not just you know
well the people involved in the project
know how it failed but to be able to
share that information and to have it
available to everybody yeah one one
thing I participated with in the Dallas
startup community several years ago is
we had a reoccurring meeting called fail
learn grow so it would be here's a
startup that we tried and and here's
what went wrong and why it failed it was
really neat to see people opening up
about that and so maybe that's also
something we could do and one of these
is talk about past projects so we did I
don't know if that would fit in this
space exactly it or not but actually I
love that have one yeah what what have
you failed that like what failed and
where did you learn and you can bring
anything to it right a relationship and
you don't happen to have a project but
like the that is what we are trying to
do it's the other tech is do the process
out in the open transparently so that if
and when we fail with every individual
step other people can learn and offer
and then we grow like all of it happens
on camera actually reminds me of weirdly
enough an ad I saw yes
today where it was Friday it was a
master class thing on
I forget what topic but it was a he
mention failing and he was talking about
Steven Tyler with Aerosmith and I guess
they have a weekly session with the
ideas everybody comes with a stupid idea
and they pitch their stupid idea and
nine out of ten times it's a stupid idea
everyone agrees that they move on but
one in ten times it's not actually a
stupid idea but the idea is you start
from try to fail and then you discuss it
and work through it and sometimes you
fail it really I like that yeah Wow I
think there's also maybe a way to
present this or like something to the
game be community that's not live on
YouTube where it's it's like on a zoo
meeting where you're put off into groups
to discuss the failure right or to
brainstorm what skill set you need to
move your project forward right like
what is the failure right now what's the
thing stopping you from getting to the
next level without necessarily having
people rainstorm your project like
brainstorming the brainstorming behind
it right like talking about that more I
don't know if that's something they can
be space a lot to talk about if they
would I'm pretty sure if it was
presented in the right way but it's
figuring out how do the one of the
things that's popping into my head right
now is the framing of we're talking a
lot about failure but the other side of
that is what's the wisdom we've earned
and there's with you know that what what
is the what is the collective wisdom
that's been been earned because it's
that's not something you gain it's
something that you earn through through
failure absolutely and through through
trying things and and so it's like we're
trying to figure out how do we coal s
our wisdom into something that's
something that people can digest because
okay maybe somebody can't come in and
watch 150 hours worth of these these
talks which you know you know not
everybody has the time to invest in
watching John robic ease you know 50
hours worth of
material and how do we you know how do
we consolidate the wisdom it's and one
other point there's I don't know if
anybody else has watched Jordan
Peterson's psychology of the Bible
series the psychological significance of
the Bible series but he talks about you
know the whether it's accurate or not
there is wisdom in very very short
stories that can be unpacked in the
Bible not necessarily sure all of the
wisdom is helpful but how do we how do
we create the story create the stories
that passed out you know that that that
trans transmit the wisdom in as
consolidated a form as possible and one
of those ways is your story and yeah
sounds a bit like one of the projects is
this is the building of project or
projects and sort of like my plan for
the livestreams wasn't to always have
viewers it was more to create a trail of
I'm gonna keep doing the same topics
like maybe every month or every two
months and then sort of keep updating
and keep going over the same things so
if you really wanted to you could watch
every session on the topic of evidence
and see sort of the how things evolved
but there's going to be sort of here's
where things are at now if you just want
to get the condensed where things are
right now you you look at our current
slide deck presentation summary whatever
it is if you really want to geek out you
can go and watch every recorded live
stream and see how things evolved if
that makes sense in context of what you
were just say you know what guys it's
well it's interesting as you were saying
that like there's also just sort of this
maybe again I bring in the word faith
like eventually there's gonna be
artificial intelligence that's gonna be
able to go in and analyze all
consolidated for us but you know that
right so maybe we are building the
framework that's used to sort of train
and format the output of that AI right
yeah just have to be careful okay yep
yeah it's funny putting some trust in a
on I like I've never written a program
that did what I want the first time do
they I but anyway I've also never
written a program that didn't have
somebody come in and use it in a way
that I did not intend at all yes right
but yeah but yeah I am hopeful at some
point in having AI assistance that help
us consolidate this information a
general had some something earlier about
presents you in the game be space to
find groups of people to kind of meet
with weekly and I think that might be
I'm wondering whether people are more
drawn to meeting with like you're in the
same group of people so you're meeting
with the same three people a week in and
week out so you really get to know each
other's projects or let's say there's a
slightly bigger group of 1215 and you're
randomly paired each week so that you
can get to know other people right and
have their their feedback and and get it
a bigger one to emerge and hold that
unzoom for people to UM who don't feel
comfortable being here but also still
have a project they want to move forward
right and then from there having this
same conversation with 30 people in five
different tables to see what is
generated from from that what kind of
meta solutions we want to focus on that
are easy that are like is that adjacent
ly possible that are like I was just
writing down what a solution is like
there's these big overarching
world-changing solutions but is it
doable now and is it with an invitation
and is it you know like everyone goes
vegan good luck with that like what is
the invitation what would help people do
that right like what is the solution
it's doable now and yet I move forward
I'm wondering if it's possible to like
you know it's really important to have
core groups of people
you get to know real well and of course
if you're working on a project you're
gonna have that core group of people but
to to somehow scale that up so you have
representatives from different projects
meet at another level of a core group
and you know kind of like the whole
liquid democracy type of scale of
thinking if if that makes any sense I
think you'd almost need to do that for
this kind of meeting so if the people
who are talking about the project for
projects you might have some insight but
you're gonna have probably a lot more
insight if you're actually on one of the
projects that's trying to use this
system you're like actually that thing
that we did discuss last week we tried
it up in the system and had these
problems or had those challenges okay
how can we address that thing that came
up in that session and I think you would
also like jubblies comment previous to
that is where or what I understood to be
is is there more value in having a
regular meeting with the same group of
people who were familiar with the
project and the problem is trying to
solve or do you want sort of new people
that aren't as well-versed I think you
need both the session that I the
objector is the project raising session
that I did the initial value was trying
to explain it from scratch and having
people ask question and it's based on
comes from a clean slate having never
heard it before they hear a couple of
things and then have all these questions
that's immensely valuable from like kind
of a a marketing standpoint if I'm
trying to tell the story of this project
how well am i doing what are the
interesting things what questions come
out of it but then on the flip side you
just keep doing that every week you're
only going to sort of work on the
circuit level how to pitch it and then
the actual core on how to do it and the
inner workings probably won't be as
well.did developed so it sounds like you
need both so we are at the hour mark
actually little bit over I'm wondering
we have no one set up for next week I
can go out and find more people because
I'm sure there will be people who are
interested or we can kind of have a part
be to this and discuss like actually
creating a
friends as something that's like people
bring their projects to that is like
whether you're you have a project or not
likes you need people the point is to
have a conversation have something
generative for people as individuals and
projects out of it I think that's a good
idea
my suggestion would be if someone comes
forward go with them but if not then we
do the Part B but even if that happens
to set this Part B aside and and do it
some other time because I think it's
important you know we we've all heard a
lot of things today and to just adjust
those things and tabah lies those things
and then come back and see where we can
go from here all right so it should be
say goodbye to YouTube so I don't have
any closing comments they would like to
make that was mine good all right
good bye YouTube