hi guy Nick Jaffe I'm happy to to be
here with you and I'm excited to to get
to know a little bit more about
something that you shared with with the
community this week and it was a story
that really really touched me you shared
how when you were young when you were a
small kid you had most polluting
disabilities and that you know you were
kind of on this path of being a little
bit dropped by education because you you
weren't like not on the same reading
level as everybody and it was pretty
significant and then you had a teacher
that came and plucked you out of a
classroom named missus Bruch's and she
had a huge impact on the trajectory of
your life and I'd love I'd love to hear
I'd love to hear you share some of that
story with me and with whoever's
listening I love I would love to I'd
love to I I have to say that that
actually in writing it which is
oftentimes the experience I have with
writing is that I find out actually find
out what I actually think once I write
it and and in in writing that down
I actually was quite moved by my own
story of what happened because as I was
writing I was realizing got to what
degree she continues to live for me and
has an impact in my life in almost every
conversation that I have and in the
evident and almost everything that I do
that I really call good and also I've
had so many been so fortunate that so
many people in my life that have done
very very similar things so I I felt
moved along with you and it's so
interesting to see how
how in a certain way how deep it's
gotten in how deep in me the way that
mrs. Bruch's was with me it's gotten in
so deep with me such that I still I'm
discovering right what she taught me and
so that's it's just it's it's such a
rich rich experience with her the the so
as a kid I was I had like it's like I I
wrote about I had like multiple learning
disabilities you know I I don't even
know if they had back then if they had
dyslexia but but I'm I hear things
backwards still I'm kind of I can attest
to that and I just and I was very very
imaginative
I would like you know I would I would
just be in fantasy world all the time I
was an only child and my parents are
amazing people and you know they have
they suffer from addiction and you know
a lot of the things that went along with
that I experienced and so there was a
bunch of probably different reasons that
things were going on probably biological
and environmental kinds of things but
you know the result was you know I go to
school and I was well behaved I just
really wasn't quite there and who all
the teachers really liked me I mean
everyone really liked me and stuff but
they couldn't teach me how to read and
and it was so it was so frustrating I
think for everybody and my parents I
remember my parents would hire tutors we
would go to special I would go to
special like reading classes I would
even move to different schools and move
around from different from school to
school and no one could quite crack the
code can I ask you a question about that
so everybody was frustrated they were
trying really hard you were being moved
from school to school getting tudas but
do you remember feeling a sense of
frustration or like what was your what
was your take on it oh my god it was
awful oh I just remember I would have
homework okay and I my grandparents
would pick me up from school and in my
grandpa's German and I don't even know
if he knows how to read if grandma did
all the books and stuff like that you
know he was a talker but I don't think
he was very so it wasn't like anyone was
much of a help but I would you know I'd
get this I'd have all this homework and
I was in third grade and I I remember
distinctively looking at the homework
and not being able to do it and feeling
so frustrated that I literally would
like hit myself in the head like I would
hold my hair I would like literally feel
so frustrated and overwhelmed that it
was it was intense you know it was
really really intense for me I would
experience like spare and like overwhelm
and all kinds of the only thing that I
remember that came really easily to me
were was with the arts I mean I drew a
lot and I painted and they sculpted and
I was always excelled in those kinds of
things that involved the imagination but
when it became math and reading it was
it must have been so relieving for you
to be in those like in more creative
realms and feeling like oh I actually
can this flows for me totally
I loved my fantasy world no one gave me
homework and then I I was held back a
year or two or something like that and
and they tried to mainstream me back
into like the regular public school and
I remember I was in I think it was in
the fourth or fifth grade I think it was
maybe fourth grade at that point I think
is in fourth grade now it was like had a
first grade reading level and then one
day I don't think anybody told me about
this one day this old girl older woman
walks into the my regular class and I
hear air called my name and she's like
come here and she's she this old
kind of old lady um really sweet and she
was so she was so nonchalant she was so
matter-of-fact it was as if like as if
as if we known each other all our lives
right and I remember feeling that
feeling with her the moment I saw her
there was a way that she just attuned to
me approached called my name it was like
okay so I just went with her down the
hallway and we walked into this room
that I'd passed by a number of times I
never knew what it was we walk in and
there's this like room filled with like
colorful pictures everywhere in these
blocks and all kinds of carpet it's
different color carpeting and stuff and
what I recall was I I went in there the
first time and we didn't I don't
remember talking ever really talking I
really don't remember talking much ever
with her about school or grades or all
those things that would just make me go
bye-bye whatever possible she just it
seemed like what went looking back which
would seem like that she did is we just
sat down and she just would start to
notice where my attention when and
instan somehow it just follow where
my interest was and would meet me there
and then two hours would gone by and
then it was time to go back to class and
then the next day she came pick me up
went to her room and and then we just
end up doing these elaborate projects
and I'd be painting things and but I
don't ever recall explicitly I don't
ever recall explicitly ever talking
about school and do you remember like
the do you remember what it was like for
you like was there a point where you're
like oh I really love this woman or I
really like this time or like you
started to notice looking forward to it
or yeah it was one of the it was one of
the first times that I I recall see I
would have a particular feeling with her
that was pretty in
instead and it was this feeling that I
only it was like a it was a world you
could say the world with mrs. Bruch's it
was a real special world but it was also
a real familiar world to me in the sense
that I that's what I it was the world
that I would experience mostly by myself
and being an only child and like growing
up in a neighborhood right like there
were a whole lot of kids and stuff like
that I would spend so much time alone
and and everything when I was a kid was
uh like everything was a whoo it was
almost like the world was a rule you
know things weren't things since time
and space they were animated creatures
every day
I spoke to be in the water in the walls
the ceiling and limit my legs I was like
medium that's really strange I'll stay
on there
so the that there was there was a
magical miss to my world alone that in
with her was the first time anybody I
walked with anybody else in that world
Andy and I in looking back and I think
that's really what it was was like is
that she actually had this way of
listening way of tuning into me and
paying attention to me that was like
drew out what was right and true about
the way I saw I think and and I never
got the sense that she was doing
anything in particular I never got the
sense of like that she was like had a
perspective that she was applying or
that she was you know doing some method
with me she just simply loved me and I'd
really come to see that like what loved
me in a particular way because there's
nothing like being loved in such a way
that like
the medium of that love is ones
attention the way someone pays attention
to you the way someone listens to you
the way someone sees you and receives
you right I think that's the that depth
of love had me I think it showed her how
I saw the world I'm smiling so much
right now because it that's exactly what
I feel in your gaze like that's what I
see you give people over and over again
that's exactly it the way you just
described it it's so yeah it has me
smiling you smiling - thank you it's
about - that's about the best thing that
you could ever tell me actually really
yeah it's so clear to me that's that's
the thing that's really stood out for me
about you from the moment I met you and
yeah so there's more to say about that
but um I also am really curious about
what you said about how you you had
already like felt this magical creative
fantasy interesting experience being
alone and how was it for you like now
you had that in somebody's like somebody
witnessing or gazing or loving you in
that how did that change your experience
in it like having her be there what was
what was that like do you remember what
I can i I think you probably get it by
saying that what ended up happening is
is I'd say about three months later now
you need to you know lay the groundwork
for the story and I think a lot of
people will relate with this every
Friday in my regular classroom the
teacher would step had the stack of
graded papers from that we remember like
picking up those papers was this thing
that I can barely even again you barely
even would be
because they just knew nothing good was
in there
what Friday and I pick up my sketchbook
paper and I put my bag and I go I do the
ritual where I go get off my bus and I
go home and then like I go inside and
then I make sure that my mom's not
around and I didn't I put it on I put it
on like the kitchen counter something
and I just assumed often oh my god I can
totally picture it because it's like it
never was good news you know bad news
bad news also the kind of bad news that
like just I felt so bad about myself
about let's do some stuff that would
happen you know until I at that
particular day did that same ritual I
did every Friday and I go to my room and
then a few minutes later all of a sudden
I hear these exasperated like aghast
like wonderous like spell struck you
know coming out of my mom's mouth
downstairs you know oh my gosh I
immediately think to myself because I
was always getting in trouble for
something right you know in some way and
so I was like what did I do now I
couldn't remember doing anything but I
was you know and so I hear she calls me
and I go downstairs and she has like
tears of wonder coming down her face in
disbelief and she's she's like picking
up the papers and she's showing me and
each one has like you know B's and C's
like almost every single paper and I'm
looking at that and I have no reference
point for this kind of experience and
she's like what what happened and I was
like I have no idea and in it what I
came to realize was that I started to
learn I started to read Oh like I
started to read and it's striking to me
and it seems so relevant that I didn't
notice it oh right like I didn't notice
it
and I think because I think it that had
everything to do with not what mrs.
Bruch's was saying to me or how she was
guiding me it was more like how she how
she was able to see how I made sense of
the world which I think we all make
sense of the world very uniquely and I
think mine was like so outside of the
range of the normal for whatever reason
that no one could could put things in a
way that like I could actually
comprehend by the way I made sense of
the world in at lama well like this she
went back there and she just like
accompanied me and got familiar with
that and then probably just had me read
but to me I was a reading I was being
right are you doing anything and I would
imagine if it was super explicitly we
were gonna learn how to read man I just
I think all of the things that just it's
one's brain from something yeah like by
that point I imagine you had so many
blocks in place to actually you know
making the connections from the woods on
the page to making meaning in your brain
you know you know the system and that
somehow she helped in in meeting you
there something relaxed and it was kind
of like a you know like a a sideways way
of getting in that wasn't so like
head-on that opened up opened up you're
seeing and like the connection between
told the woods and the meaning and how
it all processed in your nervous system
yeah that's remarkable
it didn't amazing she's wonderful and in
by that so I worked with their friend I
think for like a year maybe a couple
years or something like that and by the
time I was in sixth grade and I think
starting in fourth grade I was like in a
first grade reading level by the time I
think I graduated grade school sixth
grade I think I was scoring above sixth
grade reading comprehension that's
amazing
and what's interesting about is I
realized I
I keep learning about how I read through
the years great because I realize like I
actually don't read the way that I think
a lot of people read I think I've
noticed that about you because it's like
I noticed as you read you you read a lot
more slowly then then like I would read
something and it's like as you're taking
in the woods I or like you're saying the
words out loud I imagine you're like
actually making meaning like it's
integrating into you somehow it's like
it's not separate from you that's how it
feels when I'm in the presence of you
eating does that make sense
totally totally it's a total absorption
and I the way I've made sense of this I
don't know if this is accurate but the
way that I've made sense of it is that
she taught me how to read with my right
brain right which the right brain is
more holistic it grass larger conceptual
perceptions it's like you know it's the
integrative kind of functioning of your
experience and through the years I don't
actually if you asked me to read out
loud I'm not good at reading out loud
people pronounciating the words or like
even knowing what each sentence means
but there's more of a sense of like when
I read a paragraph I kind of get a shape
or a sense of the whole and so there is
this way in which and I remembered
precisely when I kind of discovered this
because I have a my girlfriend Brianne
who's gotten like an IQ that's like you
know she's super fatah like she's like
really specific and as an amazing memory
and and you know and one of the things I
love about her is that she shall let me
read Heidegger to her you know Oh
intense philosophy books and stuff that
are dear to me and I remember one time
reading Heidegger we were I was reading
it and we went you know Heidegger makes
up language right because he thinks so
deeply there's no words for the thoughts
of yeah so we'd have to make up weird
German language
and we went through some long German
word or something I couldn't quite
pronounce it and she's like hey I
couldn't pronounce that I just went on
she's like hey okay go back to that what
is that what is that word and I'm like I
come back I still couldn't pronounce it
and I was like I whatever it is capable
of I she doesn't know hey we don't like
I don't know what the word is but like
and I just say like look it's gonna be
clear you know three or four like pages
down what that word and all of a sudden
I was like wow there's a difference here
I don't read the same way that you do
and and I really got that sense of like
I was like and that's when I really
appreciated mrs. brushes in the sense
that there was the whole it's the whole
to the part right not the part to the
whole for me and that also answered the
question when I started to teach
circling the people so for me when I
read now it's a it is an experience so
like almost like when I'm reading a
philosophy book I'm going through an
experience I feel it in my body it's
like an idea clicks and then all of a
sudden I start like flashing to all
other frames of my life and everything
looks different in it and it becomes
more and more interesting it's like a
whole relationship almost and I'm
thinking like so so when I would so so
you could say that my life on some
regards especially in trying to figure
out how to look at circling an explicit
way to be able to teach it which has
been a ride to do and it's still
versatile I'm still investigating that
you know yeah as you understand um I
would give my life in so many regards
were defined by these authors that I
would discover that would change my way
of understanding things right and so on
so when I started to teach I'd be like
alright I'm gonna start having to read
this book and I would you know I I'd
introduce it to them and then I'd give
it to give it to my class for homework
and I'm thinking like I can't wait
they're gonna have the same experience
no man they come back in there they
would just be like what are you doing to
us yeah and so it's so there's a way
there's a way that like I think really
the point of that is is it deeper is a
deeper message that in the reason why I
really wanted to share that story is is
I think mrs. Bruch's and a number of
people in my life that have been mentors
for me in that way or have touched me in
that way that are like angels for me
like they've come into my life and what
and I've thought a lot about this and I
continue to think of a lot about this
about like well why did like what
exactly did these Kazan cuz my life does
feel very very defined in so many
regards by these angels that come into
my life and they just take many thir
wing for a period of time and I can't
remember a lot of what they said I mean
they said a lot of stuff to be we had we
would go into like deep conversations
about things that's not what I recall
what I actually experienced I think what
did they gave me it wasn't they didn't
say stuff to me it was the way that they
listened to me it was like as if it was
as it for that period of time when I was
with them I kind of lived in their gaze
and inside of their gaze it kind of
potentiated things in me and turned
light switches on in me that were never
actualized before that were just your
potential and so when I think about mrs.
brushes and when I think about Greg
Beatty know when I think about Steve and
all these different people that have
just taken me underneath my their wings
when I was younger I have a sense of
like literally feeling as if the quality
of their attention kind of ripened me
into existence in a certain degree
do you do you think that it was both the
listening but also I get the sense that
it was a seeing something in you like
listening to what what's really
happening in your world but also really
seeing like a potential or seeing
something outside of the context of what
other people were seeing had become more
of that in their games and I think about
what what that seeing was too it wasn't
a very that like Ana Tunis to their
attention in their gaze and I think each
of them It was as if like being with
them who it was
there was this background knowingness
that they that they're they emanated
with me in a lot of respects where they
saw it's almost like they maybe we're
listening to whatever was unique in me
right and then and then they would say
it and they'd see it and then they would
point to it or reference it or just know
it and then we would have conversations
and spend time together and this
whatever whatever it was that they saw
in me would start to come into
articulation would start to become part
of the conversation both explicitly and
implicitly and this is where I've just
really I think experientially learned
what the hell we mean when somebody's
when we say someone is deeply deeply
valuable to us I think a lot of people
when they ask themselves that question
or when they think about being a
valuable person I think what they
probably think is like you probably
think of somebody kind of in action or
somebody who says really cool stuff
right I think that that kind of gets in
the way of something that's even more
primordial approach or even a
preliminary to all of that which is the
depth of my attention the quality the
way that one
sees the world and hosts the world and
others in the world that have a ripening
quality to it yeah and you know and I
think about yes good I was gonna say it
also what occurs to me and that type of
listening is there's a like an infinite
openness that allows like more listening
to occur like a big whatever is becoming
in the relationship or in the gaze as
opposed to if I was seeing you in a
certain way or making some sort of just
you know putting you in some kind of box
like the this is who he is
then you've all of a sudden limited what
you can hear or what you're available to
so there's like an infinite amount of
openness in the listening and an
infinite amount of willingness to like
stand on this precipice of not knowing
not knowing what's going to become
totally totally and there's this yeah
and I I would say that you know really
we can talk about it as listening we can
talk about it is its attention we can
talk about it is seeing but I think more
primarily what we're really talking
about is the way that you truly love
someone yeah I mean that's like no I
mean that's the one thing that like is
no doubt like these people love to be
right can their way of loving me right
was the way in which they beheld me in
their gaze in their attention and that
everything that they did of course
because they loved me there was a way
there was an atonement into finding out
who I was
but already prior to like finding out
who I was
presupposes a kind of deep respect for
that I was right and that I was a person
that they came with that's the quality
of openness that they came to me with
right there was an alert
and a holding of who I was and those
people just turn my life around right my
life around and ended up defining
because that's what I do now I in it and
I was realistic I was writing the
writing the thing about this is Bruch's
I realize like a weight of it this is
actually this is what I do for a living
is is is to is to awaken that depth of
love and the capacity to see and listen
as deeply as someone like mrs. brushes
listen to me and and my whole life is a
bit about like helping helping other
people awaken that quality of love in
their heart and be able to like impact
other people around them like that's and
when people allow when people allow me
to touch them like that it's like the
it's the experience is like what it's
the best way that you could love me is
to receive to receive is to receive that
from me
yes that's a gorgeous a gorgeous
wonderful thing oh my gosh it is and it
it it's it's generous like the attention
is generous but it's actually equally
nourishing to be the one giving the
attention and gaze and love in such a
deep profound way and to have somebody
receive it it's it's equally loving it's
nourishing
I think it's the best-kept secret classy
there is nothing like being with another
human being and finding out how they how
they see the world how they make sense
of things it's like keeping company with
somebody and some because then some
level you know
we're all connected to everything else
like we all come from we all come from a
culture and that culture is really the
biology and that biology is rooted in
the physics that you know on some level
listening to you you're all connected
all the way back to the Big Bang you
know what's really cool though is that
in listening to you you actually have a
mouth so you can talk about it so
there's a there's a quality and a depth
of listening and seeing that you can
bring to each conversation which you can
actually start to begin to hear not only
what someone says but who they are and
not only who they are but the network of
relations and the mystery of being that
even has them be there itself you can
start to actually hear those kinds of
things as the listener as the receiver
of that right like I definitely am
contributing to you but boy I tell you
what like I am getting as much out of it
if not more than you are this is a
nourishing thing to sit in front of a
human being in their uniqueness and see
that absolutely so I imagine if I'm
somebody watching this conversation like
my mind would go to well how how do you
teach me to do that like that sounds
good but man I've got so much going
on in my life and oh I want to be that
way but like how how do you get how do
you help me with that how do you help
people to do that it's like you know
they're there our house to do it their
skills to learn and there's tech there's
techniques and principles and all that
kind of stuff and all that stuff's
really really important but I think that
they don't know not to say is that is it
how you do it is you do it your whole
being it's the only way you can do it is
with the your whole be right your whole
be and really
that's the one thing that I can't do for
anybody is to is to give anybody the
experience of their whole being right
being involved in something but the
courses that we do especially the one
that we're doing this weekend the
Explorer weekend is all about that part
of circling that is all about that kind
of primordial attunement that mrs.
Bruch's had with me and all the things
that we've been talking about that kind
of deep deep sense of like of listening
with your whole body being open to be
deeply moved by someone to be to listen
in such a way that like you are you're
so nourished and inspired like through
listening to them that it actually
shifts both of you in a deep way and so
what we do in the course is there's like
it's really a self it's a it's a it's a
self revelation like the learning and
how to hear you is really a revelation
and hearing myself it's so funny it
reminds me so a lot of people will come
to circling you know what thinking that
they're coming to be circled and like
what ends up happening in the process is
shifting from that to this experience of
being deeply nourished and being the one
that's listening and the one that's
being impacted and the one that's giving
attention it's it's wonderful to see
that shifts in folks yeah totally I
think that is the that is the secret
that is the secret because the thing is
this is the silence is the silent shaper
of the speaker it's the invisible one
that shapes all speaking and that's it
that's it that's something that people I
don't think think about often because
usually when they think about
communication they think about speaking
in saying the right thing and all that's
important but all speech presupposes a
listening and if you think about it the
space
soliciting versus the space of speaking
is a very different space speech you say
one word at a time one sentence at a
time but I can listen
listening is holographic right I can
listen I can I can listen with many
categories I can educate my listening
such that I can actually hear like I can
hear more of what you have to say and I
can even hear more of what you don't
even know that you're saying right and I
can also hear who's saying it and so
like even like right now the way I'm
speaking I'm speaking is is really being
generated by you're listening like if I
like how I like how I listen so like I
guess in conclusion I know I feel
extremely deep like deep gratitude for
this is Miss Bruch's and I I'm really
present to the kind of full circle of
how that's what I experience you and you
know those hurts that you know I've been
circling for a while I experienced you
so directly the same way you describe
miss Bruch's yeah wow that's really
great yeah thanks for the conversation
you bet you you I love you Kathy love
you too bye goodnight