[Music]
[Music]
hey folks welcome back to the Dark Horse
podcast live stream Q&A number 28 Tate
28 amazing amazing
oh I said hey folks didn't I oh well
Matt Taibbi on his his podcast pike made
the point that people use the term folks
too much and I'm trying to cure myself
but it's not easy cuz I say it so anyway
that's one of the things you do yeah
well folks bear with me all right shall
we get to the Q&A yeah let's do it
so I'm gonna spend about an hour as we
do we're gonna start with just a couple
of comments from what we missed last
time as I begun to do go spend about a
half an hour on questions from the first
live stream today arranged mostly by
monetary amount and then we will skip to
the questions coming in right now and
try to address them as many as we can in
the order in which they come in that is
our rubric which seems to split the
difference between the various pros and
cons of the various approaches so from
episode 27 we have just a logistical
question which actually I should have
turned into an announcement I'm also
covered in cat fur how do you recommend
a listener download just the audio
portion of these videos so he can listen
to them while driving or data signals
are spotty at best so we have the the
not the Q&A is but the main episodes are
on are available as podcast under Brett
Weinstein's Dark Horse podcast on our
face mattify apple the whole thing right
yep the Q&A is aren't I don't have a
tech answer but probably if we say that
again here in the chat someone will
there is a way you keep you can download
YouTube videos there are many services
that will allow you to do it and then
you could play them in a video player I
believe that would work in a video
player while he's driving you don't have
to look at the video you could turn it
upside down in the seat here
we are told that spotify premium would
allow you to do it also the problem is
that costs money and I would imagine
yeah yeah alright next question from
last time so I'm reading this even
though I sort of inadvertently addressed
some of it last hour what parts of Raman
DeAngelo's book do you agree with there
are Parts I agree with how do you hold a
dominant culture accountable without
slipping into tearing all the white
Jesus statues down as a sign of white
supremacy so I I really I I did my best
to steal man may be the most egregious
point in it by saying well if you if you
go back if you replace the word racist
with benefiting from structures that
have in the past been racist policies
then yes people with white skin are in
fact still benefiting from those
stretchers today I maybe will say more
about this depending on whether or not
I've got a little essay that may come
out soon and if not I'll share more of
this with the eyes later I would say two
things there are parts of her book that
I agree with the ISP and number there's
a price marker on it I believe that that
is the price I don't believe it's worth
it but I do believe it you think they're
factually accurate factually that's hard
agree with you mean you think that this
is actually a description of reality to
the extent that there's a factual
description of the selling price I agree
that it is the selling price but my
point would be why the hell are we in a
situation where we're answering the
question which parts of this incredibly
insane book do we believe in is that a
game now I mean which parts of mine comp
do we believe it I mean no the book is
so bad that searching for the good in it
is an insane exercise search for a book
that is at least somewhat good before
you try to find the parchment I'm gonna
push back on this because many people
you and I are lucky now not three years
ago but that we we presumably never have
to face one of these things again one of
these trainings went you know a
colleague coming up to you with sad eyes
and saying can you just read the book
yet then you'll understand just own your
white supremacy right like a lot of
people are still having to do this and
so being armed with okay here's a point
that makes sense and you know and now
that you've know that I've demonstrated
my attempt at good faith and
understanding what is in this thing let
me explain to you why
overall it is divisive demonic
destabilizing of good political
structure and all the rest I disagree
with this that book is a Trojan horse
and the idea that we are in some way
required to spend our effort finding
what might be acceptable in it is
preposterous this is a bad person who's
written a dangerous book and the fact is
there is a limited amount of time in a
life if you're going to dedicate it to
books find one that actually helps you
this one to read it to find the good in
it you are likely to absorb garbage
arguments so my point with you okay so
I'm just like I just read it as you know
I know I had looked at parts of it when
it came out but I actually because I was
asked to write this piece I actually
finally just sat down I read the damn
thing which drove me a bit mad but I did
so over the last couple of days and you
know I wasn't reading it to find the
good but I was reading it to figure out
you know what what what is there and
what are the kernels of truth in this
that is being used brandished as this as
this marker of fealty in this movement
is true that you can point to and say
yes that thing is true that is real
grievance that thing is true but this
approach is nasty and reprehensible well
but you also pointed out what I think
neither of us knew there's a piece of
tape of Robyn D'Angelo speaking at
Evergreen that Benjamin Boyce has shown
and I believe Mike Nene and his
documentary also shows it you know she's
just shout out to Benjamin boy so I went
to Benjamin when I told him I've been
asked to write this piece and said I
know you've talked about Robin
DeAngelo's appearance on campus on
evergreen campus can you point me and
he's done in a number of places and he
also directed me to the actually full
video and man is that one when a piece
of work yeah so she was she was there in
spring of 2016 while we were actually in
Ecuador it was just it was the same
month as the boat accident that I almost
died in in Galapagos and we see many of
the usual suspects on campus speaking
they're willfully ridiculous truths
and we see her actively dividing people
and in her language some of the stuff
that's not even in the book which wasn't
out yet like the book came out in 2018
but she was already doing her damage all
over the place we see here in what she
says even some of the turns of phrase we
then saw from our own colleagues just
months later that then took an entire
College down right so then she's
incredibly powerful this is my point
yeah um that was a talk yeah but now had
I been at Evergreen when she was there I
would have gone to that talk and I would
have asked pointed questions and I'm you
know convinced that I understand my own
mind well enough that I would not have
been persuaded by her nonsense but it's
obviously lethal to people who don't
have the proper tools to figure out how
to escape the logical traps right I'm
just saying if you're not expecting
these traps they'll catch you off guard
and you'll sign up for things that seem
safe and they won't be so I for the very
same reason that I think it is not safe
to have her visitor campus and lecture
people on the racism that they don't
know is in their own minds it's not safe
to assign people the job of figuring out
what good exists in her book it's a
garbage book fair enough
so these two just comments from last
time that I wanted to share because I
was so I was so touched by them thank
you I have a 17 year old son who was
about to march off to college I would
lock him in his room if I could and you
too you know speaking to the craziness
on college campuses specifically and you
to help me figure out I wanted to apply
for a PhD in biotechnology I got the
position on Friday thank you so much for
the inspiration keep up the great work
congratulations awesome that is awesome
congratulations all right on to
questions from the last hour I have a
friend who wakes around 3 to 4 a.m. for
about an hour then goes back to sleep
she has suffered some trauma and anxiety
I'm aware that some cultures may
different sleep patterns what could be
going on here and it looks done the
question in the private Q&A so we don't
want to just touch on this a little bit
and then probably we'll come back to it
yeah it sounds like a very normal
pattern actually exactly I'm that yet a
unbroken night of sleep is an unusual
thing
perhaps not the healthiest thing there
is something to be said for a break in
the middle it's very common that people
who have good good sleep cycles do this
and insofar as it's been looked at by
anthropologists many hunter-gatherer
societies I actually don't know if there
are exceptions to this I just don't know
how many anthropologists have looked
specifically at sleep cycles but several
and I can't recall at the moment which
which people which peoples do exactly
this it's neatly not quite so late in
the night but you know sitting around a
snare and a fire yeah um
go to bed sleep for three or four hours
and then get up and actually do some
some work or just conversation which is
a kind of work in many cases for an hour
or two and then go back to sleep for
another three or four hours and this
also apparently is known from some era
in second millennial Europe I can't
remember exactly what I do not know my
sort of Medieval and Renaissance and
enlightenment European history very well
but there's some evidence that many
people were doing that then whenever
that exactly then was yep now I find on
a related note that if I am sleeping and
I wake up in the middle of the night and
I make contact with the clock now this
is obviously not a natural pattern but
if I figure out what time it is in the
middle of the night and there's a bunch
of hours left to sleep having gone to
sleep again
having seen the clock I tend to wake up
at exactly the right moment so I'm at
the right place in my sleep cycle and
that probably has a huge positive impact
on all sorts of things waking up in the
middle of your sleep cycle because your
alarm clock suddenly decided you should
be out of bed is at least very stressful
it's it's so damaging so that would have
been perfectly possible to do under some
but not all circumstances in
pre-industrial era where even if you
were not sleeping outside you could
easily go outside and look at the moon
the position the other moon and so this
requires that you not only know what the
phase of the Moon is but what that phase
means about where the moon will be in
the sky and you can't do it as reliably
the closer to new it is but you know
given that the full moon rises
approximately at sundown depending on
how close you are to the equator
and you know Rises an hour-ish later
every every night as it wanes and
approaches again rising around sundown
as it approaches fall if you know that
yeah that all sounded like a lot of
words and how would you exactly form a
model of that well of course she would
anyone who spent a lot of time outside
you know doing say research in
Madagascar or backpacking or just in the
background tree comes to understand
these patterns and you internalize it
and it is a clock it's not doesn't have
the precision of a clock but it is a
clock yep and they're also oh sorry yeah
it won't work around the new moon it
won't work with cloud cover really right
there's also in every place on earth
local patterns which you couldn't global
eyes can say this is the pattern but
they're things that you learn if you're
there sounds of birds and insects and
such yeah when I was working on bats
when I was radio tracking active bats
you go out at night you're up all night
and the sounds are very different at
dawn and at dusk and in the middle of
the night and you know you would have
some idea how many hours had passed
based on on what you were hearing and
then like I mean like in every place
that I've been in the tropics where you
know I'm particularly attuned to the
frog calls that you know well I have
focused on the diurnal frogs the
nocturnal frogs are much more common but
two in the morning there's very little
frog call the so called nocturnal frogs
tend to start calling around dusk and
they and so near the tropics you call it
basically 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. is daytime so
they'll start calling around 6 p.m. or
so by midnight they're pretty much done
and then you'll start hearing maybe some
of them again around 5 a.m. or so so if
you wake up and there's no frog call at
all you know at least you're sort of in
the middle of the night and then in the
depth of the night yeah sorry no that's
all right ah we do in the past most
everyone participated in making music
through folk or religious later state
traditions religion morality history and
pedagogy were incorporated into verse do
you think modern recorded music has
adequately filled this role no not you
know it is no it's in fact it destroyed
our relationship to music and therefore
the relationship to each other that
used to have through music and it's a
tragedy and it's not the only one of
these either the loss of a romantic
dancing tradition I think is extremely
destructive and has resulted in all
kinds of carnage that we don't even
think of as related so anyway yes all
sorts of things you know it's a it's a
Chesterton's offense if you wear lots of
things in which it was a little hard to
put your finger on exactly what the
utility of X Y & Z was you eliminate the
thing because you couldn't tell and
suddenly you've caused some kind of
pathology that you don't even realize is
connected yeah so not so the recorded
music is not just not live so you're not
exchanging information directly with the
musicians and you're not participating
in making music yourself but it's also a
static form of music so you go back and
hear exactly the same thing over and
over and over again and that never would
have been possible yeah before so there
was information there was valuable
information in the ways that songs
changed and not just you know not just
lyrical content not just actual words
but in the way so the tempo changed
maybe maybe you know maybe the key maybe
the tambour maybe the pitch you know all
of these things a song is actually a
living entity that develops over time
and we have turned them into static
entities where you you know you know
exactly how much cowbell there is in the
song and you know yeah your demands for
more of it or go unheated yes are their
evolutionary ties to songs or portions
of songs being stuck in our heads if so
what's the utility also thank all of you
at Dark Horse I love the show
well actually I think these two things
may be related yeah that's why I put it
here yeah the earworm phenomenon may
well be about the fact that your brain
gets trained to a particular instance of
a song such that it gets recorded in
your mind in a way that it would be
recorded much more generally right and
so anyway it's likely that that has some
interface with it but I would guess I
mean it'd be very interesting to find
out whether hunter-gatherers who have no
contact with modern music ever get ear
worms or DejaVu or any one of a number
of other things yeah be great to know
the questions anthropologist should be
well I have long argued that we better
figure out what it is that
hunter-gatherers dream about to the
extent that we do not know what normal
dreams look like it would be really
important to figure that out before
there is no one left to ask yeah but
there's gonna be a lot of cultural
variability on whether or not they even
encode what happens in their dreams as
something that can be recalled right and
it's not saying maybe they don't
remember their dreams I'm saying you
know we all we all all humans I will I
will pause it without having the
evidence to back it up but all humans I
will say remember some of our dreams and
not others yeah but I suspected the
ability to recall consciously when asked
or when even just asked to think about
it privately is going to be culturally
informed by whether or not there's such
discussion in your in your milieu well I
would say unless it's taboo which it may
be I don't know it to be anywhere but
unless it's taboo everybody's gonna have
the experience of recalling some dreams
and there will be some discussion about
it no I'm not sure that's true I would I
would be shocked if it wasn't again
there may be a taboo against it for
reasons there may be good reasons that
some cultures aren't involved in it but
it it seems highly likely that absent a
prohibition the discovery that you have
awakened with some sort of narrative
experience just prior would it would
naturally come up sometimes and so
anyway I think you would get an answer
to the question anywhere that it wasn't
taboo but I would be curious for example
whether people who have never had the
experience of flying
for example ever have the experience in
a dream is that normal does the
experience oh yeah
absolutely how do you know I mean I
don't but I feel like flying in dreams
isn't about airplanes it's about birds
well I would let's put it this way I
take note sir you made plenty plenty of
plenty of people who live in countries
with a lot of air flight don't fly and
yet still writing but even so we all
have the experience and you know movies
and things so we don't know how much
we've got sort of contagious fodder for
dreams and I do know from running the
experiment in
many of my classes of asking people to
try to report what their dreams are like
mm-hmm that the variation in what dreams
are like is absolutely spectacular
the Headless dreams don't look anything
like mine okay well I think there's
there's an interesting disparity here
that I think it is far more likely that
flying in dreams is universal but that's
speaking about dreams is not universal
across cultures and you think the
opposite you know I don't think the
opposite I'm not I would I would not be
shocked if flying is absolutely
universal but what I'd like to know is
that that is the case before I just
assume it is because it's a ubiquitous
feature of modern dreams yeah cool let's
say we end up talking about dreams and
the question about songs right that was
the songs question I think a question do
you have opinions on in this together
america.org do you know what this is
Bret I pulled it up but I haven't had
time to look at it
declaration of interdependence you know
declaration of interdependence that's
what it says this is a title I have used
for a document I have written myself and
be curious what they have gotten yeah
they do use that title I don't know I
love that title so I will put this in
yellow and we'll take a look and try to
revisit this next Q&A okay okay and
similarly there's a couple more like
that someone asks if we could revisit a
thread let me know your thoughts
depredation given how much money they
threw at the problem we will take you
take at least a quick look and revisit
next time also a patreon message about
guerrilla artwork that we will spend a
moment next time looking at okay
guerrilla artwork actually I have an
interesting story about guerrilla
artwork maybe we'll return to it okay I
mean we can we can do this one now sent
a hurried patreon message about my
guerrilla artwork revising and abridging
as someone still drenched in the filth
of our societal subterfuge what siren of
truth can I sound without simultaneously
amplifying my perceived ethical
shortcomings so it sounds cool but I
don't I don't really know my sympathies
I love the question yes
yeah no you
look totally the solution to this
involves narrative it involves art it
involves music you're on the right track
so yeah let's put some thought into what
messages might be amplified and how it
could be done okay cool
next question I think a current problem
is using current morality for past
choices absolutely
couple that with conflating those past
choices with current morality and
pulling it into the present is very
harmful basically I don't think we
should have a societal book of grudges
happy for us yeah now and this is when
you were talking about monuments you
know I agreed with everything you said
but I also just thought I cannot believe
we're here like why why does this
require any discussion at all haven't we
been over this one many many times and
exactly this form the idea of erasing
history as a response to you know as if
these kids mostly right are suddenly
recognizing that atrocities happened
like okay as we know this atrocities
happened that doesn't mean that the
response is to tear down the people who
were adjacent to them or who did them
well all right now I'm gonna push back a
little bit okay some monuments aren't
despicable and need to come down in some
way right so you remember the the Nazi
Eagle that famously was blown up and
destroyed on film after the war yep
that Eagle can't stay Yeah right and
there are also statues hold on interrupt
you it was blown down then by the people
who were conquering Nazi Germany and
getting rid of the threat right and
they're toppling statues now but they
were responding that that was a history
was being made in Nazi Germany yes has
been made now they are responding to
something that happened hundreds and
hundred two hundred thirteen years ago
my point is that the Nazi Eagle that was
destroyed and I'm not saying that all
monuments need to stand obviously but
when was it the Americans who destroyed
the Nazi Eagle I think right they
marched in to a regime that was actively
proclaiming that thing as virtuous and
in the moment like that was side by side
in time
space and this is side-by-side in space
but not in time there is a remove right
but that remove means very little to me
right my point is that these people
believe this is the moment at which they
are confronting such a regime now they
are wrong they are making up history in
order to justify this but the problem is
the well okay but when are you and when
aren't you that's the question
so they are doing something and my guess
is if we looked at all of the things
that they are confronting that there are
actually statues which are deliberately
a finger in the eye right and that those
statues are a problem and the problem is
that just like they are going to tear
down people and this week okay
we've arrived at Steven Pinker yeah
right Steven Pinker is going to be torn
down now I haven't I think Steven Pinker
is wrong about some important stuff
nonetheless the idea that Steven Pinker
is a vile racist who must be torn down
is a bit preposterous
it's totally preposterous right so the
point is there are statues out there
which are truly problematic to use the
vernacular and there are statues out
there that are debatable and there are
statues out there that must stand and
somehow in the space of a week we are
you know we are dealing with tearing
down the Steven Pinker's and the George
Washington's
right but the point is you know it's a
never-ending game of would you believe
you know from Get Smart where the idea
is they keep upping the ante of these of
these claims that something is so
terrible that it is finally time that we
can recognize it and tear it down and
the point is everybody's on the list but
I mean I feel like you're making the
point of the person with the question
and my point as well which is that if
you go back into into history and try to
use the morals of today on the
historical figures you will always find
them walking you will always find modern
people lacking as well but especially
the longer in history you go back the
less likely they are to resemble the
morals of today and the easier it's
going to be to decide they're not worthy
of our respect and that is a naivete
that is patently dangerous right but the
fact is we fought the Civil War
I mean we fought the civil war we fought
the civil war because many people
understood that the justifications for
slavery were absolutely despicable and
unsupportable and so the point is
memorializing the Confederacy was wrong
at the time it's still wrong so it does
not mean that so I'm not I'm not
positive of that but but I'll accept so
anyway all I'm saying is there is no
algorithmic way to do this right you try
to write the algorithm and there's going
to be carnage that is the result of it
and so in light of that we have to have
a good faith discussion about the costs
and benefits of various things and it
may be that you know the Nazi eagle
should have been moved into a museum
about despicable things right but the
tendency to see the symbols of a culture
that has transgressed as themselves
transgressive and to want to do
something about it is a normal human
thing and the problem is that the
reaction which is that all of these
things should be preserved because
they're simply historical and in their
context they were okay that can't be
right so it's it's a difficult puzzle
and you know I mean we're tearing down
George Washington Steven Pinker and in
the center of Portland a bonfire was lit
under this beautiful statue of an elk
which is he can make just now gone
they've taken it down they've taken it
down so they win they the the city of
Portland had to spend to take down a
hundred and twenty something year old
beautiful statue of an elk because elk
are racist I don't even know it's
impossible it's impossible it's just
incoherent it's simple destruction and
my point so I you're going to say and I
think I will agree with you that even a
rubric around decisions about what
monuments from the past may have
outlived their virtue and and and
utility should not happen at the hands
of a violent mob you never oh so you so
you do agree with that oh yeah I am NOT
for seeing people pull down public
monuments because David decides
the disagreement is whether or not some
of these monuments need to come down by
some process in which we discuss what it
is that they are memorialized okay oh
yeah I'm not advocating oh boy this is
the second time this week that people
have thought I was ready to pull down
monuments no I mean but you are arguing
for for the fact that some monuments
will need to be pulled down or or or
would be we'd be better off with
somebody else pulled down I don't think
I disagree with you there I thought that
you were actually arguing and I can
actually find some truth in this that
sometimes monuments will sometimes
society might be better off if people
who are not in charge of deciding what
monuments get to stand and not are the
ones who actually say you know what I'm
done you're not listening and I'm going
I'm gonna take it into my own hands
now this what's happening on the streets
is insane and incoherent yeah but the
idea that it always has to be in the
hands of the gatekeepers is also not
safe
well this is part of my point is that
algorithmically this is very difficult
to do but you have to have a process it
doesn't have to be an algorithmic
process but you have to have a process
that at least knows what the objective
is
right so anyway I'd blow up the Nazi
Eagle sure it's already been done oh
yeah
fair points yes do the reservations
become States that's the question I
don't I don't think so yeah I think it
creates problems it's sort of like
reparations which is I get what problem
it's solving but I also get what
problems it might create yeah but I
would say that doesn't mean that there's
not a you know as I've said many times
America is not great until it's great
for everyone it has lots of greatness
unit it has been great for many
including you and me yep but until every
population is included in that it's not
done and so yeah we have to figure out
what to do so that Indians and black
people are not left behind by the
American project of course yeah of
course I don't know I feel like you or I
couldn't just decide to live on a
reservation is that right
that's right in which case making them a
state with with equal representation of
the other states in Congress and such
would be it seems to me and I can't
point to the place in the founding
documents that would prescribe against
this but that seems to me deeply
anti-american that if not all Americans
could live there and yet they have equal
representation that would not fly oh
right I think you you you would you
would need to open them up which is like
they're not their operations yeah yeah I
think that's right I support this page
indeed hi you two first off I want to
thank you both for all that you're doing
my question is about unity 2020 I love
the idea but what are you planning to do
about the Electoral College issue if we
win the popular vote but lose to the
electoral college
what then all right this is a discussion
that those who are involved in this
effort daily and we are spending much
more time on it than a full-time job
would require I mean really every spare
moment and many beyond that I think you
need to stop asking us what the exact
details of the plan are it does not make
sense to be sharing them at the moment
we have to be able to engage
strategically in a strategic landscape
and that means not simply talking about
the various details about how we intend
to solve this at the moment the question
you have to ask is if you took
intelligent people who have access to
libraries and online resources about
what the various constraints are and
those people are looking at this and
saying yes this is a genuine possibility
in this election cycle this is not a
joke it's not a symbolic act this is
something we actually intend to
accomplish then do you really would you
want the details of what we intend to do
if that also crippled the effort is that
what you want because I don't think you
do
I don't think you want us to draft
candidates too early if it cripples them
if it causes the effort to fail I think
you want us to do this properly so that
it actually works so that come January
we inaugurate people who are ready to
lead and I would ask you to please
think about whether or not you are
willing to compromise the effort in
order to answer all of your questions
right away or you would rather see the
effort function over time and be
pleasantly surprised
the next question is totally different
it's a series of questions okay
was the first human man trans creating
the first woman from his rib is the
story creating a hierarchy of biological
men above women also conversions give
birth by conjuring a spirit well some of
these stories may be somewhat
exaggerated or completely not true
that's that's a level of exaggerated
it's like full exaggeration really
really ravenous isn't the right word
Raveena's gap between the two yeah kind
of a big cavern or it would be the
adjective how do you adjective eyes
ravine ravine like oh good yes so yeah
look let's put it this way yes I mean of
course it creates a hierarchy that that
particular origin story which is Pyramus
creates a hierarchy of men above a
minimum man came first represent and you
know conversions give birth by conjuring
spirit yeah no well can't happen unless
if you're a komodo dragon actually yeah
virtual Komodo dragons could do it and I
think that they do it by conjuring
spirits I passed
we did some anthropology of Komodo
dragon well what we need to know no it's
not
so Jesus being a guy being there for an
X Y bearing human could not have been
given birth to by a virgin conjuring a
spirit or otherwise so anyway were worse
the bird were Jesus a female we could
ask the question was this a part in the
genetic creation' of of a human which
has never been noted in mammals or birds
which have chromosomal sex determination
there's parthenogenesis there is
reproduction without two individuals
coming together with gametes in other
vertebrates but never mammals or birds
so Komodo dragons being
one of them I didn't just make that part
up yep nonetheless no the obvious most
parsimonious parsimonious explanation
for all of these things is that some
narrative stuff was necessary in order
to take the payload of these stories and
link them to something that people could
remember and pass on and so yes the
stories are fictionalized substantially
Ravine like underlying this woke moment
are we seeing the replacement of merit
with a notion of merit due to social
tribal connection are we seeing the
replacement of personal virtues with a
virtue of only power games yeah I mean
two the first one in fact the very
concept of meritocracy is on the
chopping block and there are those of us
who will say just because meritocracy a
pure and true meritocracy may be
impossible under current socio-political
constraints does not render the idea
something that we need to give up or
should give up there are those on the on
the woke side who will say actually no
merit you know the the very idea of
meritocracy is itself embedded in might
supremacy and racism and all this and
therefore it's not worthy of our
consideration so yeah not only are we
seeing exactly that but it's explicit
then the second one replacement of
personal virtues with the virtue of only
power games yeah I mean that's the thing
is the post-modernism that lives at the
heart of this thing claims that
everything is about power and then it
attempts to create a world in which it
everything is about power and it's
powerful yeah this is almost that simple
that's right give up big government Bret
that's not me talking you know that's
not like you it's the top of the
slippery slope that led us here in the
first place otherwise keep telling the
truth and standing up for free speech um
I like it
I'm not a fan of big government I'm a
fan of some various things which you may
not have heard of one of them is called
subsidiarity subsidiarity is a concept
that actually weirdly comes out of
Catholicism and what it means is that
everything should be regulated at the
lowest effective level so it is not a
fan of big government but it is a
recognize it has a recognition built
into it that
everything has to be governed at the
right level and that means that there
actually some things that have to be
governed globally did he say globally
yeah I did say globally he said it it
happens that we are watching a heat wave
in the Arctic right this is really
frightening if you know what's frozen in
the Arctic all those methane clathrates
that are frozen in the Arctic that could
be suddenly released if we warm too
quickly it's looking like we're headed
there and you know what this is going to
be an emergency unlike all others if we
see the the methane gun set off as it
were so we have to be dealing with
questions of atmospheric chemistry and
ocean pollution at the global level
because that's the level at which these
processes function on the other hand we
do not want to see your local school
governed at a global level we want to
see it governed at a much lower level
quite possibly smaller than the federal
level yeah or maybe go absolutely
absolutely
so anyway what I would say is the idea
of decentralized governance has reached
those of us who are paying attention who
are thinking about how these structures
ought to work at the moment we have an
emergency that we cannot solve by simply
appealing to decentralized governance we
have a governance structure it is out of
control due to rampant corruption and it
needs to be recaptured just to stabilize
the ship just so it doesn't sink then we
can talk about what might be rethought
and we should be thinking about those
things we we don't live in 1776 we leave
in 2020 and the realities have radically
changed so you know the values at the
heart of the founding are exactly right
or at least they were a start on the
path that leads you to exactly right but
the mechanisms some of them are great
some of them are showing their age some
of them weren't quite right to begin
with and as far as I'm concerned the
thing that matters is that the values
get carried forward and that everybody
gets brought in on them and so we're
going to have to do that but yeah
decentralized would be great to the
extent it's possible we should do it and
to the extent that we have to deal with
some things with a larger structure we
should just accept it
yep I've used Brett's statement of we
must defeat the Biden trump ticket and
telling others about unity 2020 I think
it's a very effective slogan I do to
defeat Trump Biden 2020 yep why do you
think why do you two think reelect and
Donald Trump would be a bad idea I know
he's not very presidential but bring but
bringing industry and jobs to the US and
getting troops out of the Middle East
sounds good
please elaborate and thank you let's put
it this way we have seen the man's
inability to lead at moments when it is
necessary there are things he has
pointed towards yes pulling people out
of the Middle East is sensible if it can
be done safely certainly we've created
tremendous hazards for ourselves and
we've burned an awful lot of treasure in
the Middle East on adventures that did
not work out so it's it's not to say
that every single thing points against
the man but we need a leader who can
deal with kovat 19 mm-hmm
Trump botched this badly people died in
great numbers right we need people who
are able to figure out how to listen to
experts and what to do about it and how
to deal with the fact that some of the
experts aren't trustworthy this is just
simply necessary so no he's he's he slid
over from being completely embedded in
the system that has someone else's
interests at heart
but which is completely informing the
President to saying I trust none of them
and you know maybe the right president
actually needs to from scratch figure
out who it is that they trust and accept
no one who was handed to him or her
because because that's what's been done
before but the idea that there will be
no one whom he comes consults no one
whom he trusts with the possible
exception of a couple of people right in
his immediate family is clearly led to
so many mistakes and just a failure to
govern yeah and we have an economic
crisis we have a viral crisis we have a
unrest crisis and we may be on the
tipping point of an environmental crisis
so we need somebody who is a
thinker and who has the right leadership
qualities written in at the bottom level
of their code and I'm sorry he had the
right qualities to beat one of the two
major parties that's a major
accomplishment but he doesn't have the
right temperament to lead the nation at
this point and he's got to go okay
let's get through just a couple more
here and we'll skip to the other thread
guys I love your show but I think you
should debate supporters of critical
theory as this feels like an echo
chamber sometimes I believe vouch is one
of them and I'm sure he would jump at
the opportunity so I don't know who vow
is but I will say that we spent decades
debating supporters of critical theory
because we were academics we were seeing
the germs of this when we were
undergraduates and we were fighting
against it then with no platform and
there wasn't internet widely available
at this point in the early 90s and we
have done so I think just once
explicitly publicly in debate here in
Portland actually before we moved here a
couple years ago and very well yeah it
was it was quite interesting actually
and actually this that's where we met
John Wood yeah who he was he was not he
was not he was not one of the people on
the other side he was moderating and
he's now with bravery angels
organization
terrific it was an organization called
bridging the divide or bridging our
divide that ran it and it was a there's
audio out there of it the video was was
pretty bad and I think it was
fascinating but the fact is that you
spend literally decades talking with
that you know at various volumes and in
various levels of private conversation
to entire faculty meetings this stuff
and at some point it's actually not
contingent on us to keep on talking ad
nauseam to the people who will not
respond in good faith yep
you know so you frankly I mean there are
different levels I also had a I wouldn't
call it a debate it was a friendly
conversation with Thaddius Russell who's
a postmodernist on his podcast No
oh voice & exit' did a thing and it was
hosted by I can't remember who
libertarian of some kinds out there
somewhere it's out there somewhere
anyway Nick Gillespie at reason is also
a postmodernist by his own diagnosis and
we have not discussed with him actively
but he's in our circle and would be
happy to do it but yeah I mean either of
those I mean I I know I know Nick better
than I know next work and thinking
better than that ESS but that's that
just feels different
right there because it's good and that
they've come to very different
conclusions both of them about what is
wrong with with the current thinking and
academia but they like we are open to
discussion and to hearing things and you
know the the one extent conversation
I've had with Nick actually you know he
he told me things I didn't know and
that's you know that's what I look for
in every conversation it was wonderful
yep but there are concepts out there so
bad that they don't merit investigation
right there's a point at which you you
know you realize that time zones exist
and that the Flat Earth Society might be
off track how many times do you have to
engage the Flat Earth Society yeah yeah
so anyway critical race theory is is
that which doesn't mean it started there
it didn't it started as an investigation
of systematic biases in our court system
which is still exists and are important
okay we got a three-part question here
and then we'll skip over to to the next
one
what is the evolutionary significance
I'm going to read all of them
what is the evolutionary significance of
humanity's confusion about the hard
problem of consciousness suppose you
studied a dead civilization on another
planet could the presence or absence of
this search say something about the
presence or absence of consciousness in
an alien civilization and suppose a
powerful AI claimed to be conscious with
the independent emergence of the hard
problem of consciousness in that mind
provide any basis to suspect that it's
confusion is sincere I'm trying to parse
all that yeah that's that's a lot so I
don't know that we are obligated to
respond to all of them let me start by
addressing the idea of a civilization on
another planet I'm not sure you know you
say suppose you studied a dead
civilization on another planet what
would that what could you learn about
the presence or absence of consciousness
and alien civilization I think if you
use the word civilization and we could
spend years talking about exactly what
that means but if you're talking about
civilization and they have consciousness
you know we see the rudiments of
consciousness in organisms on this
planet that wouldn't be understood to
have civilization but they have sort of
the glimmerings of culture elephants and
toothed whales like dolphins and great
apes and wolves and such and I think and
again we could spend a lot of time
talking about this that that will be
true every place that you find
civilization in the rest of the universe
that consciousness is a necessary
precursor because it is about the
exchange of ideas and absent exchange of
ideas there is not going to be the
possibility for civilization what would
you do if you found remember this
extraordinary piece of footage where
somebody pours concrete down a leaf
cutter ant nest and then digs it up and
you have this elaborate structure with
all of the various chambers connected by
all of the various passageways 3d
sculptural map if you found that on
another planet what you know that it
wasn't a kind of civilization no not
necessarily because I'm pretty sure
there's no consciousness involved in
that yeah so we're getting into you know
what what is it that you need to see to
distinguish between sort of a an
organism that is so you social that
really individual organisms don't have
much being unto themselves such as is
the super organism that is the unit that
matters in terms of whether or not it's
how it behaves yeah or are you looking
at something that has as we do and
glimmerings of eusociality where but
still absolutely retain our
individuality and make decisions that
are often distinct from and different
from
what the rest of the society is doing
yep and even a very large organism could
throw you if you weren't familiar with
the tree of life that it had come from
you know an organism is a hyper
organized thing with lots of division of
labor and exchange of information and
the I think the problem is definitional
hmm defining civilization is easy enough
when you're talking about you know the
earth and you're basically limiting
yourself to the versions of it that we
have seen well both of your both of your
examples use the concept of the
individual as what causes us to be
confused right that is a single organism
of civilization well no it's a single
organism well what if you didn't know it
was a single organism is an ant nest
civilization well probably not but
that's because it's like a super
organism and those individuals aren't
really fully individual so this all gets
at the at the question of what is an
individual and how it what happens when
individuals come together and have to
share information that's the origin of
consciousness and then they can become I
don't want to say civilize and that's
not right but then they can create
civilization but it does it the premise
is that there are individuals with
agency right but even then even I mean
all I'm demonstrating here is that I can
wreck your definition of civilization no
matter what you throw at it because even
a single organism you know we have our
gut flora and those guts are exchanging
information with us and it's a
partnership and we also have our
mitochondria and our mitochondria are
separate individuals that have then
become so synonymous with us that we are
you know we are hybrids that regard
ourselves as singular but we are not
yeah so all of these things mean that
any definition you throw is gonna fall
apart in some cases and sometimes very
central cases yeah it's not just the
edge cases yeah everything's in educates
when you get right down to it so that's
not helpful that's my point I'm trying
to have to be helpful in order to point
out why you can't do this
but this here I should also just say I
don't think you or I think that there is
a hard problem of consciousness that's
not to say that there's not a difficult
problem of consciousness but a hard
problem suggests that there's some sort
of
special boundary that prevents you from
elucidating in the case of the hard
problem of consciousness it is usually
claimed that the nature of consciousness
is itself difficult to explain and the
fact is it's an evolutionary adaptation
like everything else which doesn't mean
that we have the explanation nailed to a
fare-thee-well at the moment but you
know it hasn't been long that we've had
the explanation for and I nailed down
either so give us some time on
consciousness yep
okay we're going to switch to the next
thread or the the Q&A the questions from
this live stream the super check
questions for this live stream so I
think you've drawn the line at least one
off but I think that this is the first
one from this live stream yeah pretty
sure for one thing we already answered
the question the question right above it
so it must be from the previous live
stream left evangelical movement before
I'm gonna just read it first I don't
know yet how to parse it or where the
punctuation belongs left evangelical
movement because of rigidity of dogma
now fellow progressives remind me of
same in their insistence I work on my
racism and not challenge black voices
had any success and changing anyone's
mind friends have good intentions of
course intentions don't matter so I just
did this they were just trying to save
characters to get the question in this
person left the evangelical movement
because of the rigidity of dogmas aaron
is now finding a similar rigidity in the
ideology of the left yeah I think it's
even worse than that I was reading a
subreddit and somebody posted a comment
about the frightening situation that
they faced this was somebody who had
come to the u.s. from abroad from a a
country with a dictatorial regime and
their point was my family has seen this
before yeah I don't know what to do it's
very frightening I know what it is but
people who haven't seen it before don't
know what it is and they're falling prey
to it and anyway that's alarming yeah
and the comments that followed that
comment also reflected other parts of
the world in which people have seen this
and
descendants who are now here are
recognizing the analogy and people are
rightly concerned about it
I also detected something in this thread
that I thought was pretty important
something I had never put together
before which was that the communism that
happened in the Soviet Union resulted in
slavery by a different name that
effectively rural people were enslaved
to create the productivity that kept the
Soviet Union going I never put that
together right I knew it was terrible
but I didn't understand that basically
they had reinvented slavery as a
mechanism to make that civilization work
and I'm not sure that's very far off
from the Great Leap Forward either no
it's in the sixties early Maoist China
so in some sense I guess what I'm saying
is to the extent that this movement
imagines that what it is is the final
complete uninvent of slavery it may be
the reinvention of slavery and that that
is something that we have to track very
carefully yeah so embedded in this
question was had any success in changing
anyone's mind
I don't maybe we should announce this
here we actually have a podcast and tens
of thousands of people sometimes a
hundred thousand people in in a matter
of a couple days we'll see episodes of
this podcast and my guess is they're
convinced of something so the the
premise there is that not everyone and
arrived in lockstep right and they never
do
but anyway I guess my point would be
look you know our story's weird we stood
up people in our immediate midst were
horrified some people in our immediate
midst were encouraged people far and
wide were encouraged some far and wide
were horrified but you know yeah
absolutely reaching people is it happens
and it it changes things so I don't know
what more to say but yes I think I mean
unless you're asking some question I'm
not quite spotting well I mean I do
think the question is more more about
not the fence sitters and the quiet ones
who were waiting to figure out what they
thought but the ones who are vocally
woke
who are vocal social justice or me um I
have been approached by a number of
people who said I had it wrong I thought
you were the villain and then I
discovered it wasn't true I'm so yeah
Gavin people it's not that it's by far
not the bulk of the people but those
people also are not the majority that
they would want us to believe yeah they
are not yep I agree self-awareness and
ability to abstract obviously adaptive
advantageous for survival of each
organism but could it be a liability for
the species or at least for the
ecosystem once atop the food chain does
it have diminishing returns
yeah can I take a shot yes yeah okay
you're a robot with a computer that has
software running on it that software has
a lot of heuristics in it that means
things that aren't written out fully
literally they're things that work
approximately right if they're in the
circumstances that they're built for
right so your whole visual system uses
various tricks to parse the way photons
are bouncing around the world but it
makes objects that are real appear real
and you know where to find them by
experience right so those heuristics are
because they are not the object itself
they can fail if they are faced with
data they can either fail because the
data is noisy or worse they can fail
because there's something systematically
off about the data and the problem that
you are identifying is that we are wired
to deal with a social world in which the
illusion of self is useful but empowered
to actually bring something of the self
into the world and treat it as the
important object many people fall into
that and they do not understand that
they are a tiny blip on a long
historical trajectory and that it is a
gift to be alive for you know 80 90
years but that that is not the point of
the exercise all right the point of the
exercise has to do with that long
trajectory of history and that becoming
obsessed with yourself that solace is 'm
is actually a hazard to the entire
project and we are seeing that in the
streets there is a kind of narcissus
- this movement that just simply does
not understand where it is embedded in
history and because of that the whole
project is in jeopardy would love to
hear commentary on the Trump speech from
at Rushmore seems his speech writers are
alluding to the work of James Lindsay
and Helen pluck Rose will this further
satirize critique of satirize is the
right word they're sanitized maybe is
what was meant um have you I've not seen
the speech I am not sure if I've seen
the speech because I saw a speech by him
that I had not seen this morning and I
actually clipped it and we were gonna
talk about it was he at Mount Rushmore
that's what I don't know is where that
speech came from it may well have been
his Mount Rushmore speech but this
particular clip a minute or so contained
a lot of truth and my sense is that we
are caught in some dynamic where the
whoa cleft is now handing the president
truth just as we have handed over
science and we have handed over reason
and we have handed over the logic behind
governance and all of these things we
are handing over all of the most
important stuff to one side that is also
fiercely ideological and this is a
terrible error but at the other hand you
know I don't want to be part of the
group that just because the president
says it thinks it's wrong it's not how
it works right if we're gonna hand over
science to the president and the
president's gonna defend it then well
when the president defends science you
know he's he's saying the truth yep next
question from echo you said communism
can't work because jeans will openly or
secretly work at least partly for
themselves would it work in a nation of
clones maybe with different clone types
for each function like ants yes let me
okay so that was your answer I actually
had just an aside so ants aren't clones
but they are mostly female workers who
if they share both a mother and father
are three-quarters related to each other
the sisters are which is more closely
related to each other than the
are to whether their mother or would be
daughters and so they're invested in
protecting their queen their mothers so
that they can get more sisters at a
purely genetic level they win more when
they get more full sisters than they do
by breaking out on their own and
producing kids of their own and so you
end up with a youth social society which
is quite close-knit and has very little
reason for competition within it
although obviously competition does
happen so there are no ant clone
societies there are for instance well
unlike nomads offer us the whiptail
lizards in the Sonoran Desert go
parthenogenetic and they have you know
totally they're still not clones they're
they're actually parthenogenetic so
there are a hundred percent each kid
each daughter is a hundred percent
related to its mother but they self
they don't clone and so you lose genetic
variability with each reproductive event
but in each of the cases of the
parthenogenetic species there's some
place to borrow diversity from so even
down that road we're not going to find
with the right tails for model right lip
tails and a fits and all the others but
anyway the thing you're looking for the
answer is a simple yes right the body is
communist that's what it is it's
communist because all the cells are
clones and it works and communism can
work hey isn't that good news you know
what you need to make communism work
brutality you need to reorganize
people's motivations by threatening them
if they act according to their
individuality which is why communism is
so frightening and you need to keep up
the brutality day-in day-out forever or
you never ends or you need to build it
into people's developmental environment
so that they can't think for themselves
you turn them into to sound like
cultural zombies so anyway it's a very
bad idea and that doesn't mean it can't
be made to function I mean and this is a
it's just it's very clear
the fact is for life to be worth living
the human has to be liberated to
discover what is good it does not mean
that everybody uses their Liberty well
they don't most people squander it but
having Liberty is the gift that we
should be trying to give to other human
beings and a communism
exit because it requires brutality in
order to overcome the individuality that
would cause the game theory to break
down that's a very dangerous situation
so it is not a glorious solution to any
problem do multiple identical twins get
along any studies doing some so I don't
know this could mean pairings of
identical twins where you have more than
one set of identical twins within
families do the different sets get along
or we talk about multiples like triplets
and quadruplets do they get along either
way I don't know the answer to our
question
now there were double mint gum
commercials that suggests that identical
twins often get along and look lovely
that's we're probably the target
audience for those like a preteen yes
probably but here's the thing twins
identical twins do get along very well
and they have a very good reason to get
along very well they get along really
well for the same reason that your liver
and your heart get along they have no
reason to disagree and then at some
point we will delve deeply into the
story of Kalat rickets I think we've
mentioned it once before but Calicut
monkeys have a whole different twist on
this identical twin thing and no it's
not identical twins yeah they go ahead
and get it twisted they get it twisted
this is Marva sets and tamarins yellow
chickens which are marvelous they are so
weightless Reacher's yeah and actually
includes this crucem yeah
they include the smallest extant species
of monkey the pygmy marmoset tiny tiny
little guys as adults with long tails I
put in a lot of work and I got a great
picture of a pygmy marmoset in our last
trip to the Amazon
that was this year what do you mean this
we were in the Amazon in 2020 yes that
can't be right
yeah it's gotta have been decades ago my
god hmm yeah before coronavirus we're
about an hour okay let's do four more
how about where could a genuinely valid
scientific study quantifying wow I just
lost my place could a genuinely valid
scientific study quantifying how much
influence past racism in its current
incarnation is having on each specific
community in the States be done if so
would it be desirable to do so yeah I
see no obstacle
this I don't see it is not clear to me
as my experiment design brain is working
here and I'm trying to figure out what
all the inputs are that you would have
to track and and in what way over how
much time with different degrees of
accuracy and I don't see how it can be
done well I think you would start
because I think you would have different
kinds of error in different places so
that you couldn't just say it's all kind
of imprecise but it's all it's all
accurate ish I think there would be
different different degrees and
directions of error let's teleport
ourselves 50 years into the future okay
50 years in the future where whole
genome sequencing is available at a
trivial price this assumes a lot about
what happens in the next year or two all
right let's pick the timeline in which
we're still around fifty years from now
technology has continued to advance for
genomics so that you could do an
excellent phylogeny of people and you
could actually track the fine-grain
relatedness and you could figure out
what percentage of each person came from
what prior population and let's say that
you could reconstruct the history of
slavery so you could see which
individuals were enslaved where and then
you could do a statistical analysis of
the ways in which people live and you
could compare it to the percentages that
go back to each of these ancestral
populations and groupings mm-hmm and you
could just simply test hypotheses of
cause and effect anything impossible
there I'm not sure I don't I don't I'm
not sure how operational it is operation
Eliza below I don't think it is
operationalized well I'm just trying to
see in principle if such a thing is if
it's a valid line of inquiry yeah no I
think it is but I mean this is this is
exactly where we will tend to butt heads
and it's not butting heads it's just I
read the question as very much one about
County
cool science be done and I'm not sure it
can be I don't think it's operation
Eliza ball and so well I think I agree
with you about that yeah I'm sure it's
not operationalize about today it's not
practical in the future when the
technology supports it does it become
possible I don't know yeah but I think
it's theoretically possible so then the
second part of the question so we're
still in the first of the four questions
we're gonna still try to get to hear it
would it be desirable to do so assuming
we have moved forward which means we're
also in a different you know social
milieu but what we want to um I think I
got this one yeah I believe it is
necessary that it remain allowable right
you have to be allowed to investigate
any empirical phenomenon I don't think
it would be desirable I don't think the
answer would be helpful right because I
don't think it an't it does anything for
you that is useful in terms of actually
remedying the problem and ultimately
what you want is a society in which the
downstream consequences of of racism Jim
Crow slavery all of those things has
been neutralized where we are all in on
the same story where opportunity is
distributed as widely as possible and
where the degree to which it is not
evenly distributed is randomly
distributed right in other words bad
luck cannot be totally stamped out but
it should not be more likely that you
encounter bad luck if you're black for
example that's not bad luck that's
something else
so the ideal solution does not depend at
all on the answer to the question of how
exactly have the the downsides flown to
different people through time right
they're independent so as long as the
right solution doesn't depend on the
answer to that question I don't see the
advantage in pursuing it in fine detail
there might be some things in it that
would be desirable to know right because
we would like to know what the harms of
those things are and how they have
travelled through time but the fine
grained analysis probably isn't
worthwhile but again the ability to
study it somebody else may have found
some reason that it would be valuable to
find these things and much of what we
have derived value from in science comes
from what we call basics
which means science you do and you don't
know why you're doing it you just think
that actually knowing the answer to how
something works might be helpful in the
future for some reasons and so it's
worth the investment so it's got to be
allowed I don't see the advantage but
the most important thing is that the
remedies are not dependent on the
answers to those questions and so
there's nothing that should stop us from
going to the remedies immediately I want
a large an asterisk but we don't have
time to do I have one I'm not sure that
we need to allow everything that is
possible and maybe I'll just leave it
leave it there you know we we were told
by a would-be advisor in graduate school
that some questions shouldn't be asked
and they were exactly some of the
questions that we were interested in
asking and it struck us as destructive
of science to be told that you just
shouldn't ask some questions if people
imagine that the answers that you get
might be politically unexperienced
but there are there Chesterton's fence
is being torn down all over the place by
scientists trained in reductionism who
cannot begin to imagine the effects of
things like cloning for instance ah well
I'm not talking about everything needs
to be allowed at the level of
gain-of-function research or okay so
empower what doesn't but but here a full
investigation the investigation of any
phenomenon so look I would I would
accept a caveat based on what ya said
there are certain phenomena that in
order to investigate them you may take a
risk that is unacceptable in that case
no but an empirical science so that it
isn't as easy and lovely a statement no
it requires judgment which requires
gatekeepers which requires that the
gatekeepers themselves be regularly
judged and assessed as to whether or not
they're doing an honorable job at all
okay so you've defeated me an open
combat here you are right that my
statement is incorrect there are things
we must forbid ourselves but what I
meant to imply was that at the level of
investigation nothing should be
forbidden because of what you might find
out yes right things might be forbidden
because it's too dangerous to find them
because of what finding them out might
allow you to do um well no okay I would
say that the only place you can really
draw this line is that if the finding
out is dangerous then Society has a
right to prevent it if the knowledge
might be dangerous the problem is you
can't draw that line well right because
as soon as you say oh there's certain
knowledge that would be too dangerous if
we had it then what you've done is
you've established the need to judge
which knowledge is dangerous and then
five minutes later we're screwed yeah
yep
so asterisk right maybe we come back to
this yeah that's a good one yeah okay a
pen penultimate question this one's just
a logistical one I think from what I
understand the Bret and other patreon
have different purposes so what are they
also how can a patron find the mentioned
discord you know we haven't really
specified they just they're both doing
their thing we're doing the Dark Horse
membership over at mine because flipping
back and forth in logging into the two
of them was proving was driving me a
little bit crazy so we're doing that at
mine and the part of Bret's that he is
you know really tending to the most are
the once monthly longer conversations
for the patrons at the higher tiers and
we don't yet have the discord links up
there but we will do so maybe not by end
of business today
fourth of July there is no business by
the end of the weekend for sure okay
we'll have those up yep anything you
wanna say about well I should probably
say I do feel a little bad there's some
stuff we've set up the patreon my
patreon a long time ago and we guessed
at sort of what the tiers should be and
it's more complex to change thing I
believe it might have actually been a
suggestion of Joe Rogan on the very
first time when we went when we went
down to LA with our kids when we left
Olympia and he was in his old studio and
Hannah we met him we spent some time
talking afterwards he was terrific he's
just a great guy he was a great guy and
then I think he said start a podcast and
and get a patreon and people want to
hear what you have to say that's true
he's
start a podcast and I said I have the
name it's gonna be the Dark Horse
podcast and he said don't do that it's
gotta be your name right otherwise he
did but that's why your name was on it
that's why Brett Weinstein is Dark Horse
podcast was the the compromise position
yeah um but anyway yeah I think he did
suggest it but anyway in setting it up
it was very hard to figure out what the
teacher should be and some of them have
worked out less well than others but
what I would say is the result of that
patreon is the podcast now there's other
stuff too but there's a lot of podcast
coming out and that is really what this
has gone to support and you know it
exceeds anything promised in the patreon
so to the extent that I have fallen down
on things like newsletters the podcast
hopefully is is a worthy compensation
yeah and we really really do appreciate
this employer Sam you do sir it is
allowing us to do this and as are the
super chat questions yeah buddy
appreciate it two more questions would
love to hear your thoughts on Jordan
Peterson and his current condition is
there any possibility of him showing up
on the podcast as well as others from
the IDW well you had Eric on last week
yep
two weeks ago or whatever that was um
would love to have Jordan on I tried to
contact him he is out of the country I
believe I won't say more than that I
don't know I know Mikayla was on Joe
Rogan recently and Mikayla and Jordan
did a podcast together and I haven't
seen either of them so I'm a little
hesitant to say where things are because
I don't have the most recent updates but
would love to have Jordan on of course
and he is welcome anytime and he's still
doing better he's continuing to do
better yeah Eve was a very close call
for the entire family and I believe
everybody has squeaked by and we
couldn't be happier it's really
important and I hope he will use his
voice right now we do yeah okay final
question what do you think about
creating an anti woke Pro humanist
Coalition for the exhausted majority if
something like that becomes popular when
people stand up against the mobs they'll
know there are people out there that got
their back yep that's kind of what we
were suggesting is that you figure out
how to bootstrap these things and my
guess is they would coalesce ultimately
that to the extent that different
communities figure out how to get their
reality check from others
who are not so sure about what's going
on that ultimately those communities
would find each other and we might be
able to deploy reason at scale wouldn't
that be cool
deploy reason at scale there's a tag
line for something oh yeah all right for
this fourth of July that's it boy a
reason it's scale yes deploy reason at
scale please check out the Articles of
unity sign up with us follow our Twitter
account and let us please get some
leadership in the White House is it is
way overdue if we can do it in January
we will be much better off we'll be back
on Tuesday Tuesday until then well
[Music]
you