[Music]
the life stylist episode 118 feet Daniel
smart and burger
[Music]
I'm Luke's story a former celebrity
fashion stylist and founder of school of
style for the past 20 years I've been
relentlessly dedicated to my deepest
passion designing the ultimate lifestyle
based on the most powerful principles of
health and spirituality the life stylist
podcast is a show dedicated to sharing
my discoveries and the experts behind
them with you
[Music]
all right I've got two questions for
your first question is do you like
orgasms obvi the answer to that is yes
second question are you going to be or
can you be in Los Angeles this Friday
night January 19th now if the answer was
yes to one and the answer is yes to two
then I'm going to tell you where you
want to be and that is joining me at one
taste Venice for the intuitive holistic
healing event we're gonna be talking
about orgasm and consciousness yes they
do meet they do relate so if you're into
things like meditation exploring desire
the relationship between masculine and
feminine energy how to balance that
healing through sex
strengthening intuition through orgasm
and pleasure and the importance of
boundaries then you want to come hang
out with me and the one taste crew so to
get into this events very simple just go
to Luke story calm forward-slash events
and you will find it there it's 40 bucks
prior 45 the day of again that's this
Friday night January 19th from 7:30 p.m.
to 9:30 p.m. at one taste venice again
to get your ticket go to Luke's story
calm forward-slash events I can't wait
to meet you there
do you know anyone suffering from Lyme
disease autoimmune issues heavy metal
toxicity parasites gut problems
inflammation etc I bet you do it might
just be you I know I qualify for a
couple of those and I have found the
most powerful and effective natural
solution it is known as the amp coil
really really crazy amazing technology
so go-to amp coil calm and you will
learn all about what I'm describing or
you can also go back and listen to
episode number 98 with the founders but
I've been getting great results with the
amp coil for cleansing detoxification
sports recovery my sleep is off the
chain stress reduction mental focus
cognitive improvements neurotransmitter
re-education this is the ultimate health
biohack and I happen to use it a lot
when I meditate and I'm just relaxing
this is a really amazing discovery these
guys have put together five or six
different technologies into one device
and it's professional-grade device but
it's for home use which makes it really
easy to use and simple and just
profoundly powerful I'm gonna warn you
though if you get one you're gonna have
a house full of people all the time that
want to use it because that's what
happened to me so if you want to check
it out go over to amp coil calm and they
will be more than happy to answer your
buttons
well hello my fellow brave homosapiens
i'm luke story and i'm here to bring to
you the second episode of this 2018
happy new year and this one is not going
to disappoint my guest today is Daniel
'shmock dan Berger who is a scientist a
complex systems designer and an
evolutionary philosopher he's also the
co-founder of neural hacker collective
and the founder of emergence project a
futurist think-tank now I found Daniel
through neuro hacker collective we make
my all-time favorite nootropic stat
called quali I talked about it in the
show all the time it's by far the most
potent and well thought out brain
supplement I've ever taken so I just had
to track down the guy behind it now when
I found neuro hacker collective I
discovered wow these guys are up to a
lot and qualia is just kind of the tip
of the iceberg so in this interview we
really talked about his vision for the
company and for the world and I got to
tell you what he's just one of the
smartest people I've ever sat down and
had a conversation with in my life so
seriously I'm not even exaggerating 47
years he's one of those brilliant people
I've ever talked to it was fascinating
to sit down and get to engage with him
it's as if I would ask him a question
and I thought my questions were pretty
well thought out and fairly bright you
know I mean I knew I was gonna be
interviewing someone with a brain in
their skull so I put some thought into
it and I had a lot of stuff that I
wanted to cover with him because I knew
he had a very broad body of knowledge
but I'd drop a question and he'd
basically break it down into eight parts
and then proceeded to just run circles
around me it was like he was like doing
donuts around my brain just like
oh you know and I'm not being
self-deprecating at all I think I'm a
fairly smart guy but he's on another
level but what's really cool about
Daniel is a he's super humble and he's
also got a lot of heart he's someone
who's been you know deeply into
meditation and metaphysics for a long
time so he has this really warm friendly
spiritual vibe but he's also highly
analytical and scientific and the way
that he approaches the woes of mankind
is very fascinating because he zooms way
out and looks at everything from a
systems perspective and that's kind of
his whole model and so when he looks at
the human body our cognition nootropics
all the stuff that we get into he's
really looking at the whole body as a
system and then the goal being once
you've kind of upgraded your system and
you're optimized then what are you going
to do out into the world and so as a
result as we sat down on his bedroom
floor essentially on some pillows just
had this great talk I wanted to talk
about health and the brain and qualia
and how they come up with and all this
stuff and dude we we ended up like
opening up this vortex you know this
sort of portal of consciousness and we
talked about homeschooling and the
difference between that and the public
school brainwashing that goes on and
political correctness cultural Marxism
post-modernism the North American
genocide you know that little thing that
we we don't tend to like to talk about
much so we really went into some of the
systemic issues of our society and of
culture and then went backwards and sort
of reverse engineered that in this epoch
talk in terms of our personal subjective
mental health and well-being and how
that we can get that on track in order
to make a positive contribution to some
of these larger social and cultural
issues so this one really veers off kind
of off track of it from some of my
normal shows and this might represent a
trend in 2018 I might you know leave the
reservation a little bit here and there
and go into some of these other areas I
by no means want to make a political
show because I'm definitely not
qualified but I think that there's a lot
to talk about
when it comes to building the ultimate
lifestyle and community and our culture
and society has a lot to do with that so
that's the basic gist of it some of the
other things we talk about that might be
of interest to you and make your ass
keep listening to the rest of this
episode till the very Y was gonna say
bitter end but it's not a bitter end
it's actually a glorious end because we
really get into some deep stuff towards
the end of the conversation but we
talked about the fact that all human
beings alive today basically have some
degree of mental illness and what we can
do about that some alternatives to
capitalism again zooming out looking at
some of the more broad issues and some
possibilities that aren't even part of
the conversation yet the basis of all
addictions and what to do about them and
the folly of looking for happiness out
there the origins and the vision of
neuro hacker collective they are up to
some really cool stuff and he allowed us
to be privy to some of the launches that
they've got going on in the near future
and it's really really exciting stuff
then we cover of course all of the top
smart drugs and nootropics why and how
they work and some of the risks and
benefits involved in their use and then
we get to cover one of my favorite
topics briefly which is geoengineering
chemtrails and the effect of those
programs on our brains and on our
biology and that's something I'm going
to be talking more about this year
because I just I missed the blue sky
that used to exist in the 70s when I was
a kid it was really beautiful some of
you weren't there to appreciate it but
we really used to have this thing called
sky and it's been hijacked for a number
of reasons which we briefly discuss so
this is an info an action-packed episode
I'd like to invite you right now to put
on your little bunny suit and dive into
this massively deep
rabbit hole with myself and mr. Daniel
Martin
all right so here we are with Daniel
Schumacher and Berger good to see you
did good to see you my friend thanks for
having us into your home I look forward
to this conversation thanks for coming
yeah dude we're gonna we're gonna go
deep here my friend so I'm just gonna
jump right in a couple things that I've
learned about you from reading about you
and listening to you on other shows is
that you were homeschooled that's true
and at the same time you're a really
bright guy who is very knowledgeable and
articulate I would consider you and I
don't throw this term around but I would
consider you to be someone that's highly
intelligent to the point where you could
be called brilliant and I don't call
everyone brilliant you're a really smart
guy so why did your parents elect to
home-school you and what impact has that
had on your on your you know a mental
acuity so it was a educational
experiment my parents were interested in
and my dad particularly spent his life
thinking about educational philosophy
and human potential and how do we
actually actualize human potential
better and my mom had shared interests
and different skills and so they they
decided to take it on together and the
experiment was what happens if we give a
kid no curriculum at all no fixed
curriculum so I didn't have English and
social studies in mathematics and but
just expose them to everything possible
facilitate their interests and see what
happens and so that was the experiment
and having gone through the whole
experiment we could do it much better
now they were parents it got learned
along the way but the effective parts
that I would say we're a successful
experiment is every kid has profound
fascination with life in their own ways
and we usually do a good job of breaking
it and we also usually do a good job of
training them not to think well so
little kids ask what is that what is
that what is that at first right it's
the first question they're getting the
anatomy of universe down and then why
why why and the depth of why run into
philosophically and physically deep
questions that we usually don't know how
to answer and so we give them we just
don't answer them or we give them
answers
made-up answers yeah but there are some
less conscious parents who say because I
said so yeah because it just is or God
made it that way or whatever so when
ready to asks why is the sky blue and
most adults realize they don't actually
know something that is that fundamental
to our experience every day right and
all human experience they either say I
don't know how do you spell cat right
like they move it into the domain of the
gnome but they move it from something
that was fundamental about the nature of
universe to something that wasn't and so
if you really want to explain why the
sky is blue you have to understand that
our upper atmosphere is made of nitrogen
and oxygen and the percentage of it and
nitrogen specifically as n2 and how
molecules work and how light coming from
the Sun works and the speed of light and
diffraction and understanding what
optics is and it like there's a lot of
deep things and then the wait that's why
it is that specific wavelength but why
do I subjectively experience it as blue
so now we're looking at the mind brain
interface right and the relationship
between consciousness and physics and
kids want to know that right they want
to know why is fire hot which again is a
 deep question and they're like
every kid asks these things and since we
don't know we don't facilitate what
they're naturally fascinated in that if
hasni by and we force them to be
interested in stuff that is totally not
interesting and in doing so we don't
teach them the interesting things we
don't teach them the things that are
foundational about life that actually
lead to the ability to understand
everything else and we actually break
their interest in life which is why then
they just want to veg out watch TV or
you know the the whole welfare person
phenomena whoo yeah is actually I was
gonna say they've become great taxpayers
but see those are broken people that's
the key insight is that everyone has
born fascinated interested and if you
facilitate that then not only are you
helping them learn a tremendous amount
and you're and they're gonna be
fastening about different things some
more in the direction of aesthetics or
ethics or fundamental science or
athletics or but there will be a unique
genius actualization if it's followed
and so that was the experiment and we
could go on about educational philosophy
but one of the key like insights there
is that we have an educational system in
the u.s. right now and in most of the
West that was built in the Industrial
Revolution to make
Industrial thoughts and it was the thank
you no I love going here I was hoping I
was hoping we could get into this carry
on please and so as we started to look
at building industrial supply chains
then we wanted every assembly line
worker before we had automated that task
to basically be anatomica right they
would do the exact same thing and so
anyone who had been trained into doing
that could be replaceable
they were fungible for anyone else and
any MBA from a good business school was
replaceable for any other MBA and the VP
of Marketing and so we want to take
unique humans and collapse them into
fungible roles and so then we can just
have an org chart and say I'm looking
for three of these and four of these
totally replaceable in the process of
doing that when you collapse the
uniqueness of a human to a fungible role
there's of course the intrinsic motive
to do that is gone deep competition in
comparison because we're competing on
being the exact same role so we're
competing on the same metrics rather
than any uniqueness like there's no way
to compare Salvador Dali and MC Escher
in DaVinci because how the would
you do that right like there you can't
compare them on the same metrics and if
like if Dali hadn't done what he did
some other artists wouldn't have done
the same thing universe would just have
been less that was the uniqueness of
that being expressing in a totally
 unique way which is why all
artists for history hadn't done that
thing and so so much of the jealousy and
the comparison competition also comes
from being collapsed to categories and
there were reasons why we did this as we
you know for all of human history until
not that long ago until the beginning of
what we call civilization 10,000 years
ago give or take for 8 million years of
hominid history we never had got more
than 150 people and those hundred and
fifty person tribes everyone could be
pretty unique and that should get along
well because they knew everybody else
and they could actually keep track of it
and as soon as we want to go to start
having very large numbers we had to
create some homogeneity between everyone
so we started making them a lot more
like termites or ants which are animals
that can do a lot of them working
together but within a class a worker ant
or a groan ant they're all federal right
they're all replaceable for each other
so this system is very much like that in
education is the indoctrination into
being going from a unique human to
but dude you just described my hole in a
very deeply intellectual way my whole
experience subjectively with education
and the whole time you're talking about
caste and this is why I do what I do
because I'm so curious and so fascinated
by the way things work and what the
questions of why right and so I was
always seeking truth even as a kid like
how does this work why does it work but
the system that I was put into and
literally physically the desks I was put
into we're like little torture chambers
and and my creativity was actually
discouraged and and was almost forced
you know forced to join the basketball
team because I was having behavioral
problems and their solution was like
cool make him conform to something that
makes him even more insecure and feel
like even more of an outsider being the
kid with long hair and refusing to wear
the right shoes I wore my vans and slid
around the court and got made fun of and
you know harassed and picked on and
stuff like that and it's like once I
turned the day turned 18 I quit high
school I was marking it off on my
calendar like a prisoner you know
putting notches on the wall is like
marking the calendar to October 29th
1988 and that was the day of freedom and
from that moment on once I left school
then I became obsessed with learning and
so it's so interesting to look from the
standpoint of your perspective because
it wasn't it I didn't want to learn it's
that I didn't want to learn that way
those topics and those topics yeah no
way yes and so now it's like you know
here I'm 47 and I'm like I'm like the
most curious childlike energy I think
there is I mean I don't know anyone
that's as curious is me about the way
things work and it's such a gift to be
able to interview people and and really
learn about this stuff so so that's so
no note how fortuitous that your parents
you know you were so situated that your
parents got that you had an opportunity
to take a different path now it's
because you didn't actually identify you
you didn't actually succeed at school in
that way that you were able to actually
do something else to the degree you
succeed at it then you're trapped by the
continuation of that curve
so notice the smarter the kids are smart
meaning good at that particular
definition of smart the earlier we push
them in the hyperspecialization all
right we want to give them an AP classes
towards their specialty young and then
the further we push them in
specialization so by the time they do
their dissertation ten people in the
world know what the they're talking
about so they know so much about such a
narrow area so they're not thinking
about big picture things or 'the
interdisciplinary things at all that
means that the smartest people aren't
actually questioning macroeconomics and
questioning culture and questioning
governance questioning the foundational
axioms of how we do academia or science
because they're they're just doing one
tiny little thing so we're training them
to be very sharp cogs in the industrial
wheel of furniture and the only people
are usually left thinking about any big
picture things are people that didn't
have those types of proclivities and
that is actually a way of taking things
that could be dangerous and making them
not only not dangerous but very good
tools of the continuation of a
particular system and so because you
didn't actually do that well at it then
you were able to say I don't want
to do something totally different right
that it's interesting it reminds me of
something I've talked about on the show
and there was this I gotta find this
freaking it was some study or evaluation
or paper or something that I came across
at one point and it was talking about
entrepreneurship and how the top 10
people with the highest IQs in the world
all work for someone else and all the
great inventors and the you know
monumental colossal entrepreneurs in the
world dropped out of high school didn't
go to college I mean it's this universal
trend that the smartest people don't
think outside of the box and it's the
theory was that the people that you're
describing that are highly specialized
and that rise to the top of their class
intellectually that they're so smart
that they're able to over calculate the
risks involved in a venture of
creativity whereas if you have a more of
a visionary creative type that doesn't
fit within that box but also obviously
still has a certain degree of
intellectual prowess that they're smart
enough to have the idea and creative
enough to have the vision but she
doesn't dumb enough to not
to calculate the risk and be willing to
go out and walk the plank and lose it
all for the sake of so saying dumb
enough is one way of thinking of it
another way of thinking of it has to do
with the way they're trained in
relationship to risk aversion okay okay
I like that cuz I think of myself as
that and I tend to be self-deprecating
so I appreciate you seeing in an NLP
wave seeing that word dumb enough so
what is really happening think about
this if the kids would get to 4.0 one of
the keys of getting a 4.0 is making no
mistakes right like that's how you
that's how you write that is that you
did everything right and everything
perfect now everything right means you
learned what had already been figured
out was the Orthodox truth and you were
able to repeat it effectively right and
then at a certain point once you
understand that system completely enough
you can extend it a little bit which you
know in the postdoc level you take the
current whatever the field is an
extended a tiny bit after proving that
you understood it you know perfectly
people who got a lot of praise and a lot
of success and identity around never
making any mistakes and getting
everything perfect
are not oriented to do things that have
a very high risk of failure that's
created an odor so when when kids are
praised for getting things right you
 them up because a number of things
one so think about this in general all
the praise that kids get is when they do
something that the authority wants them
to do and has already designated as
right and good and true right so whether
it's the teacher the preacher of the
parents they give praise for doing what
someone else wanted them to do they
almost always get punishment for doing
things that made sense to them that they
wanted to do so this is how you
conditioned people to be good cogs
within an authoritarian system where we
defer our own agency our ability to
assess the world in our own agency to
somebody that knows better than us and
the teacher the preacher the parent
right they all represent that and then
it becomes the boss and the you know
macroeconomy the state the etc writ
large and so if we want people
that actually can really be innovative
we can't train them that way
we have to train them to self-assess and
self-initiate and not actually get hits
of praise from getting something right
that others already figured out and when
we do that like oftentimes there's a kid
who becomes a Spelling Bee champion or
math genius because they just happen to
 figure out like how spelling
works or how math works and they got so
much praise for it and they weren't
getting enough unconditional love
otherwise that they were optimizing for
the extrinsic reward associated with the
math of getting the praise even though
they might actually hate math or be not
terribly interested in that they just
happened to get it if you didn't do that
then you might find math is alright but
they're actually fascinated by art and
so then they can become very good at
something they have no passion for and
it's all based on extrinsic motive that
is damaging intrinsic motive Wow do you
have kids I don't have kids
like you'd be a great dad dude I was
picturing your kids man they're gonna be
so well developed if and when you have
that I don't I don't I don't either
I have I think partially because I'm
like terrified of not doing a good job
of it because I still feel like I'm
doing so much work on myself but it's
interesting to think about a generation
of people close to our age that have an
understanding of things in this way that
can actually assure in the next
generation of human that is allowed to
express their full potential without
being confined into this system and most
of the people that have the deepest have
have had the deepest exploration about
the nature of reality either aren't
having kids because they see how much is
wrong with the world and they're
applying that creative and parental
energy to trying to solve problems in
the world or they don't feel secure
enough in the world with nuclear war
looming again for the first time in
macroeconomic collapse and i'ma change
etc to want to bring kids in so okay so
moving on into I mean there's stuff
literally there's so much to unpack and
any one of these topics but there's so
many things I want to cover with you but
the education thing definitely piqued my
interest just learning that you were
homeschooled but you're really bright
guy so where's the connection and that's
making sense the see I didn't go to
college to me higher education was moved
to Hollywood playing a band
deal drugs done I mean I had it figured
out so I thought then I went to LA CC
for like two weeks I took health and
which you know later I guess came to
serve me if I only made it two weeks and
I took health and classical guitar I was
like oh cool learn how to play rad
guitar you go in there like oh we're
gonna learn how to read music I was like
no that's math I'm out but when I look
at higher education now just from what I
see in social media there's this just
where we are culturally is so
interesting because this millennial
generation I read something the other
day for example that they surveyed a
bunch of Millennials and 50% of them
indicated that they would prefer
communism over capitalism you know and
there's this whole post-modernism and
and Marxist ideas and all this to me
really crazy stuff that this seemed to
have seeped its way into higher
education and you have this generation
of kids that are in this weird Orwellian
1984 thought police political correct
insanity like what's the deal with with
that right now and do you know what I'm
talking about and and do you think this
has been perpetuated intentionally or is
this just a natural progression of a
plus B equals C and how things have
carried on all right that's it like
quite a few really deep topics mixed
together any that kind of unwound yeah
so post-modernism as one topic in its
relationship to higher education okay
the trend of higher education writ large
and the other issues beyond
post-modernism looking at macro economy
and questioning capitalism and looking
at other macro economic systems and
generational dynamics that millenials
are expressing are all important and
they're somewhat tied but they're also
for some different dynamics so in my
classic interview style I just asked six
questions under one umbrella yeah so
we'll take a stab at any part of that to
me I'm just you know I'm very zoomed out
and I'm looking at things that I see
like that like wait kids don't
understand communism doesn't work how
did we get they heard you know it's just
it's so bizarre to me in this whole I
don't know the climate of there's free
speech being crushed unless the people
agree with you like this sensitive
snowflake weird safeSpace whole College
thing okay so the issue as I see it is
actually quite nuanced and complex and
most of the reactionary simplistic takes
on it are part of the problem so let's
explore this nuance all right mental
so let's take the issue of race okay
which is right at the heart of that
topic we can look at race we can look at
gender we can look at transgender LGBTQ
we can look at any of those dynamics
that are part of the identity politics
part you're bringing up right now this
is related to post-modernism and it
derives some of its intellectual basis
from post-modernism but it's also
related to some other key things so if
we look at race and we look at black
lives matter or people of color movement
or etc we have not ever properly dealt
with the fact that this land that we
call this country was fully inhabited by
lots of Nations of people that we
completely soldered to make this land
right it was we're getting taxation
without representation in London we
don't want to be here anymore so we're
gonna go somewhere else and hey look
there's a whole continent that's totally
free because we have better military
than equipment than they do so we can
kill all those people and take the whole
land there's a real moral
problem - having your moral legitimacy
as the United States of America and the
beautiful Constitution Declaration of
Independence being based on genocide and
we're pretty happy to acknowledge like
after Germany's genocide they're
up
right there's a whole cultural thing but
our genocide was not that long before
and was more people there's a lot more
people wow that's interesting and it was
the genocide of the Native American
people employing the slavery of the
Africans and we mean real
slavery like captured the people by
military force killed lots of them
tortured and killed lots of them
lynching etc and we we don't want to
really acknowledge that this country was
built with that it was built with a
pretty decent amount of Chinese slavery
a lot of African slavery and one major
genocide all right so then we've got you
know we have to fight a war to finally
get rid of slavery
that long-ago like really not that long
ago where there are old people alive
today that still remember elements of
slavery dynamics right like that's a big
deal to get but then okay so we abolish
slavery without abolishing the mindset
that was associated with it so a lot of
people didn't want to go on so then
we've got Jim Crow and segregation and
all that and then we kind of overturn
that kinda right but slaves actually
economically work really well it's kind
of nice to be able to have people do all
the work and not get paid and be
able to concentrate the profit margins
and as soon as you don't want to do that
with the slaves now people got to take
you know other people have to take the
 jobs and who wants the jobs
and now you have to dilute the profit
margin to pay minimum wages so there's a
lot of people that just didn't like that
right for legitimate understandable
reasons and they could justify making
another group of people different enough
that slavery was better than their own
sacrifice in that zero sum game dynamic
right or near zero-sum games anemic and
then we have okay so now it's not full
segregation legally but that mindset
still there and the people who are
coming out of segregation have
generations of trauma and no education
and no inheritance right as opposed to
people who are coming from generations
of Education inheritance and not the
same types of trauma so we have the
ghetto phenomena and what that means and
we we know how epigenetic trauma works
now generationally right we know how
mimetic trauma works and so then we look
at do we still have a system of systemic
injustice yes we still have a
system of systemic injustice and any
white person who wouldn't just trade to
be black recognizes that the ethics of
the pie slice theorem aren't in place
right pie slice theorem is if it's just
there's a symmetry right between you and
I which is all kite the slice of pie and
you get a pic which side but I don't get
a cut and pick right if I if I cut in
pic there some up or you can cut
and all pic but anyone who says I
wouldn't want to trade positions with
the other person but they should be fine
with it there's a problem and that's
that's the dynamic here so there is a
real response to unresolved trauma that
is still affecting things now that said
the response is coming from a place that
has largely influenced by trauma rather
than clear strategy
and trauma usually perpetuates itself
and so if a bunch of people of black
lives matter is saying hey there are
real issues where there are a lot of
black people who are getting killed by
police for reasons that are totally
unfounded and then not getting
prosecuted in the same way not getting
attention in the same way like that's a
real deal and how does anyone go about
trying to go to school and feel safe
when you can be going to school doing
all the right things and and have that
kind of dynamic occur all right so then
they go shut down a freeway out of like
upset and anger whatever and then well
that's trying to get attention for
something that is real it is
strategically problematic right because
then you have the all right largely
arising as a response to those type of
dynamics saying look our way of life
that we care abouts being threatened and
look these people are rioting and
causing chaos and whatever they're
validating our ideas about them not
being strategic good thinkers etc and so
and because of a postmodern dynamic that
in general the progressive left has it
makes it harder for them to cohere
because they want to validate everyone's
perspective because they're suffering
they're still in response to the pain of
imperialism or one in perspective as
imposed on everyone so part of the
response is to say hey everybody
actually as a perspective and the
perspective that you're saying is just
true because it's science or whatever a
lot of our social science that arose at
the same time as our physical science
was actually just imperialism and so
post-modernism emerged amongst radically
simplifying here post-modernism emerged
with a partial meaningful truth which
was to say this is just objectively true
this is science we did the right
epistemology subjectively true and it's
true for everybody doesn't acknowledge
that especially as we get into the
social sciences there's a ton of
bias right and so we went looking for
monogamy and pair-bonding in the animal
kingdom because of Victorian age ideas
that actually made us do zoology badly
right and so we like we see that kind of
thing everywhere so post Martin said
actually different perspectives on
reality running different experiments in
the building different kind of insights
and we still know that are you
healthiest
a vegan diet or a paleo diet I can show
you just as much research on
both of those that look at different
metrics right and so whether I'm looking
at pH or I'm looking at insulin levels
or I'm looking at telomere level like
I'll get different answers and also
which populations but when I try and
reduce health to some finite set of
metrics and there's a million
metrics that we can't calculate I can
get a lot of partial answers that seem
like the whole answer and seem like
complete science because I'm studying a
very complex system a very simplistic
way so bias is very easy when you try
and set a complex system in a simple way
because your metrics look really
clear they just don't happen to be all
the metrics that matter and so
post-modernism acknowledged that and
said hey all the perspectives actually
have to be factored now there was a kind
of virulent version of that that didn't
acknowledge there all the perspectives
should be acknowledged but they're not
all going to be equally true some of
them can have distortion in them so we
need to be able to vet for distortion
and all the perspectives are going to be
less different in simpler systems so in
chemistry the epistemology is more
straightforward than it is in social
sciences and some of the virulent
version of post-modernism just started
rejecting truth writ large right like
any claim of truth as an imperialist
claim and nobody can claim truth and all
perspectives are equally true and but we
can see that that was a virulent version
of an appropriate response or a to abran
the way that science imperialism
capitalism along with fucking's like you
know colonialism right all kind of Co
emerged and trying to untangle those was
like part of the goal there so if you
actually read Foucault or Derrida
there's meaningful good thinking in
there most of what you see happening
that tries to intellectually reify
itself with those people is not actually
being done very well but that's because
trauma is influencing a lot of it but
then on the other side we've never
actually taken responsibility to deal
with that that trauma was created so
when I say it's nuanced it is and it's a
really big deal because if we look at
they all the alt-right and the control
left they have moved to a level of
polar's
and radicalization that is very hard to
imagine how that reconciles and with a
tremendous amount of fear on both sides
and trauma on both sides and associated
with that the desire for secession from
the nation the desire for whatever that
leads to war in a world where military
technology assets that we don't get to
make it through Wars so what we did in
the past and so the idea hey look we
thought a war with the British to come
get this area and it worked well yeah we
have muskets right and as the
military technology goes up it becomes
more and more problematic and when we
get to the level where you have
decentralized exponential technology
which is where we're at right now we
don't get to make it through Wars
anymore and humanity has always had
different dynamics that led us to
polarization and radicalization and then
war and we have to actually learn how to
 deal with that and part of it is
we have to be able to understand how to
take multiple perspectives they have
partial truth find the successful parts
and figure out how to do dialectic how
to do synthesis and be able to find a
solution that doesn't just solve for
some things while externalizing harm to
something else it's effective but
actually solved for the whole set okay
so that's just the post-modernism
snowflake part does that makes perfect
sense because to me looking from the
outside I'm like I I see the trauma and
I see that these young people that are
wrapped up in that ideology I see them
as victims you know and I but I'd
anything about the past I'm just like
you victims of a perspective that you've
adopted and I guess because there was
trauma and I'm just like God it feels so
bad that this kid thinks the communism
works it's just like yeah I want to
address this part yeah when in the
depression there were people openly on
the streets discussing socialism Marxism
lazy fair capitalism because the system
was failed right you in a failed state
people are open to like look at any
possibility we are very near a failed
state and we're actually very near a
failed civilization globally so when you
look at climate change and the fact that
we can't get it right right
like we can't get it right we keep
driving ourselves towards the point of
self induced catastrophe and possibly
extinction and despite the fact that the
Club of Rome identified this over
shooting limits in this 60s right and
and limits of growth in the world three
models despite the fact that it's been
called out we're following the model we
keep progressing on the
model right the Paris Accord was not
enough for us to make it we would have
everything would have been if we
did the Paris Accord and we couldn't
even do that right and so and that's
driven mostly by our current structure
of capitalism because if I over fished
the ocean right if I use a mile long
drift net and I take all these
fish out of the ocean that's more money
for my fishing company this quarter and
leaving them in the ocean is worth
nothing to me
economically now it's worth something in
the future but the other guy is going to
fish them out if I don't fish them out
so it's not like I can leave them there
for the future so it is a competitive
race for near-term wins
mortgaging the future so we make
thirteen species a day extinct on
average we've fished out 90% of the
large fish species from the ocean on a
three quarter water planet that took
three billion years to get all that
 life and in a hundred years of
industrialized fishing we fished out
ninety percent of the large fish species
extincted many of them ad print of the
old-growth trees gone that's capitalism
working really great not working really
great right we're on the verge of a very
realistic AI apocalypse where we should
be developing the area very slowly we
should be very intelligently looking at
what it because when Edison's working on
a light bulb and light bulb fails it
just doesn't work maybe it blows up no
big deal you do it inside of a container
you work on AI and it fails and
sometimes it doesn't work and sometimes
it kills everything because it is an
autopoietic tech it is a self-organizing
self authoring tech light bulb isn't it
works or it doesn't work but it's built
on the outside but but biotech right
where you make a new life-form
and now it replicates and it does its
own mutation that is a self-replicating
tech where if you get it wrong you don't
get a stop it and nuclear wasn't right
nuclear is a reaction and then it stops
it
really bad but nanotech biotech and AI
are autopoietic self-replicating tech
that might be depending upon how we do
them in commensurate with biological
life as we understand it with faster
feedback loops than us now we should
develop that as slow as possible
because the upsides are awesome but we
should do it in highly controlled safe
to fail environments but all of the
fiscal incentive is getting to market
first
that's a capitalist incentive who gets
to market first where we're in a race
towards the cliff and the arms race is
the same thing why do we have when Carl
Sagan showed us in the early 80s that it
only took four 100-megaton bombs to kill
all life on Earth with a nuclear winter
why do we have 600 times that many why
the do you keep making nukes F do
you have enough to kill everything down
to viruses because if you have a
for-profit military-industrial complex
where you have a source of supply where
you need to manufacture more demand to
keep your supply going it's not like
supply and demand is a real thing
there's an initial demand you create a
supply but now you you have supply and
you manufacture artificial demand which
is why we buy all kinds of that
doesn't make us happy that we think will
make us happy because marketing creates
artificial plant so capitalism is
actually broken
existentially so there are people who
learned that okay
Marxism had some nice ideas and there
are some good ideas it didn't actually
end up working out that well no of
course if we really go study it we never
implemented Marxism just like we've
never implemented lazy faire capitalism
we've implemented weird models of
capitalism and by the time the USSR came
around it was nothing like Marxism for a
bunch of reasons but Marxism doesn't
actually work at scale it it works that
kind of model works at 150 person tribal
model it doesn't extend beyond it
capitalism did seem to work but have the
cost of radical externality that
externality when you get to this many
people in this much tech actually self
implodes so what has worked up to this
point worked worked epic at but you when
we say it worked up to this point we
have been utilizing Unruh knowable
resources moving towards the point of
criticality the whole time and it has
required war right and it has led to
diseases we didn't have before because
of environmental devastation and etc and
we have a world where today almost
everyone has low-grade mental illness
like ubiquitous addiction ubiquitous
low-grade anxiety existential angst
fairly decent low-grade depression right
these are not natural to the human
condition
tribal people don't have the in the
same way so we say it worked define work
this is optimizing for some metrics at
the expense of others in a complex
system so the fact that there are people
questioning is there a better
system than this because we're not
fixing climate change in the system
where it's still more profitable to do
the up thing with a perverse
incentive is ubiquitous and health care
why do we do biohack and stuff like why
does in health care prevent diseases
because there's no money in
preventing diseases at a lot of money
and treating them there's not that much
in curing them but there's a lot in
treating them forever so what is gonna
get researched when the money goes in
has to have ROI back out of the
capitalist system so the fact that
people are recognizing that in
questioning is a very good thing now the
fact they try to find other things that
didn't work as the answer is just a
basic basically hopelessness and a lack
of knowing how to go about solving
something so hard so one of the
core focuses of my life is what is the
macro economy of the future what are the
governance system sort of the
civilization systems they can allow us
to actually human together well without
needing to go to war and Unruh noble use
of resource and producing liquidus
mental and physical illness that's
unnecessary and etc and it's not any
system that has ever happened so we can
get into that if you want to or we can
go to other directions but also most of
the young people who say communism what
they're really saying is Denmark looks
better than here like that's a social
kind of dynamic where that our access to
medicine don't have a lot of homeless
people masters to PhD is average level
of education largely secular because of
that like the Nordic countries just look
better they are they're just
better there's more socialized dynamics
now are they better on every metric no
if you look here we have a tremendous
amount of innovation here because of
certain types of freedoms and a
tremendous amount of damage and our bell
curve is very spread out and so for
everyone who's not winning in the system
to say
nobody is losing as bad in Denmark as
they are here and there's a lot less of
them and they're not ruining the
environment as fast they're actually
figuring their trash problem out maybe
let's actually think about this and I'm
actually not proposing Denmark as a
solution I am saying there are a lot of
things that are actually evidentially
better on meaningful metrics and the
things that are adequate to the scope of
what do we do with almost 8 billion
people and distributed exponential
technology don't yet exist oh my god
does amazing that is a lot to unpack and
it's funny because I've never actually
talked about any of these issues on the
show it's always very much about
meditation or mindfulness spirituality
or just full-on health stuff but I know
that you have a systems approach so kind
of zooming out and looking at like whoa
what's even beyond hey am i optimizing
my sleep or take you know how does my
blood work look this year I mean this is
stuff that goes way above and beyond
that and where are we going from here
which is interesting I just think it you
know I earn the question because I I
knew that you'd be someone that could
answer it in a way that encouraged more
questioning but it's such an interesting
time to be alive that's why sometimes
it's hard for me not to deviate from my
format and the basic topics and get way
off into this stuff because I'm watching
things happen that have never happened
before as we all are right it's just
such a trippy time on earth and there's
so many positive things going on and I
feel that there's this massive awakening
thanks to people like you and shows like
this and just the proliferation of
information through social media through
the internet but at the same time it's
so dark and we are on this you know as
you said about to go over the waterfall
I mean we are at the precipice of
absolute destruction while at the same
time there's this light that's really I
think we're in this sort of spiritual
evolution at the same time it's just so
interesting it's just for a minute on
the are we talking about biohacking
meditation spirituality individual
optimization are we talking about
interpersonal collective up well nor of
this I've seen normally on the show it's
more just subjective each person
optimizing and then that rippling out
into the
community-at-large right but we've sort
of like zoomed out and are coming back
in from the other direction so there's a
dynamic model here's what we have to
think about them together if we work on
increasing our cognitive capacity and
our energy and etc so that we can do
more of what's killing the world then we
go extinct faster because of it okay or
optimizing ourselves to like integrate
into a system that is not working and
that's most of it right like I've heard
we watched as we started you know neuro
hacker we were looking at the amount of
smart drug sales going up and smart
drugs that increased hyper competing
increased motivation and drive while
decreasing empathy decreasing creativity
and making hyper competing Psychopaths
like modafinil yes okay like adderall
okay but modafinil can do things in that
direction that's different I just came
true I don't do at all but I do my dad
fell from time to time and when I'm on
modafinil I don't think I've become a
bad person but I definitely am NOT
interested in interfacing with other
humans at all like very task-oriented
and locked into whatever I'm doing which
has its place but it's definitely not
like hey man I should go out and give
some hugs right now it's like get out of
my way don't interrupt me I'm focused so
how do you this is the key thing is like
let's learn how to win at the game that
is killing the world no let's not do
that right let's learn how to have the
capacity to create a new game that's
really the thing that I want to
emphasize here and even the people who
are winning at the current game are not
living happy meaningful lives for the
most part when we look at hyper normal
stimuli right why it's so easy to get
addicted to sugar because in an
evolutionary environment we just didn't
have sugar right we had a little bit of
fruit and the fruit was not hybridized
so so there was a major evolved opening
reaction to get it because the caloric
density offered increased ability to
survive a famine now we have so much
 sugar but we sell the same
dopamine response that that's a
dangerous phenomena I had one almost
stimulate and then we find that of
course social medias I - almost a
million because everybody's pictures are
prettier than they actually are
and everybody's liking you and you're
like me
and you don't have to face like real
difficulties of interaction and it can
be a huge number of people in a short
amount of time and porn is a hyper
normal stimuli and there's a whole
generation of kids becoming adults who
don't know how to relate to women who
don't know how to have sex properly who
have issues erectile and etc because
they have oversaturated a certain kind
of stimuli and normal stimuli are
actually very insensitive to it right
and video games are hyper normal sense
so we've had a world that's just all
hyper normals to deny which is addiction
which always corresponds with less
fulfillment right because it's
desensitizing you to actually getting
pleasure from life and so you need the
hyper normal stimuli to get the the hit
and so you need the whatever it is
however many likes that your thing gets
her and the hyper normal stimuli
proliferate s-- in the presence of hypo
normal stimuli which is we don't live in
a tribe which is our
evolutionary environment where we
actually have real authentic
interactions with lots of humans
regularly and so imagine in a tribe
where you're dancing around the campfire
regularly most people find that when
they go camping with friends they aren't
checking their phone as much right after
the first day or two and the addiction
kind of chills and the presence of more
authentic fulfillment there is less
emptiness pushing some hip and so the
society we've optimized for is a hyper
hypo normal stimuli to everything
meaningful where everybody's
lonely and has some sense of
meaninglessness and a lot of pressure
you know together and so then in that
place addiction is going to run rampant
and most people have 30 to 50 different
addictive behaviors meaning compulsive
 they know isn't good for them they
keep doing totally that's really
interesting because in the model of the
12 steps which has been the the most
effective single thing in removing
deadly addictions from my life the model
there is what I think people from the
outside of that model think is that oh
you go there and you quit drinking or
you go there and you quit sex or
overeating or whatever it is you go to
some 12-step group and that that's what
your problem is but that you get there
as subjectively one gets there and you
go oh that was actually the symptom
right so I'm addicted to heroin well why
because of everything you just described
so is
this set of principles then going to
just take that addiction away know what
it's going to do is it's going to give
me a framework to live by spiritual
principles ineffable laws right that I
can apply to my life to become more
fulfilled and then the need for that
thing that I was using goes away and
it's the straight I mean I've
experienced this again and again and
again using that model of getting the
human connection and a spiritual
connection and like living by those
principles that kind of keep your mind
and emotions in check then that problem
is removed the principles represent a
pretty small percent and the human
connection represents a pretty large
person mmm like the group dynamic and
the group support I guess if that tribe
we're missing right you walk into a room
there's twenty five people in there that
you might not know but they understand
one another on a deep level because
you've both suffered in the same way
think about it how many people get the
blue book read on their own apply the
principles and quit their addiction
nobody nobody that's now that's funny
whether they join that group or they be
joining the Christian group where they
join whatever it's mostly the
fact that we are actually social
primates right involved in tribal
environment and so when in the 12-step
thing what's happening is the main thing
happening in those rooms is you have
people having authentic sharing about
things they don't normally get to share
about so they feel seen they see other
people in there's real intimacy right
and most the time again the world
praised us for certain very narrow
things and we're optimizing for a lie
all the time
now just because this is adjacent to a
topic I want to discuss this is one of
the things that is most gruesome about
social media and I'll say most gruesome
about the topic of personal branding and
I'm using the word gruesome you know
acknowledging a strong word I struggle
with this a lot so I'm looking forward
to what you have to say when someone
creates a brand as a business but even
if not they're just social media and
there's a persona right but let's take
the brand as a very clear example
they're now a life coach their yoga
teacher they're an Instagram all
or whatever the it is right which
has become radically easier there used
to be a few people to that with based on
the media tech now everybody gets it to
some degree of this then what happens is
I have a feedback I have an analytics
mechanism of how much people like my
persona which is how many likes the
thing gets and how many clicks and
impressions and purchases whatever you
know thing and so I'm going to nail it
test
optimize my persona based on what people
are responding to and they're gonna
respond the hyper normal stimuli and so
the brand is gonna get based on the
financial driver based on the analytics
is going to evolve in the direction of
what gets maximum engagement it's gonna
get further and further from who I
actually am there'll be whole areas of
who I am that I definitely don't share
because they will actually be
anti-correlated to what gets the like it
and the more people are liking that
thing now that I feel different than the
more depressed I feel right the more
addictive desire I have in that
depression that they'll get a hit right
and put out another thing that's
gonna get a your likes and the more I
feel like a fraud and a phony and that
if anyone really saw me they wouldn't
love me and I'm really unlovable and etc
right so in the 12-step room the
opposite of that's happening right
someone is actually saying I'm a
 up I just did all this dumb
and they're like I get it me too
yeah woah a real human interaction just
occurred
yeah and which is rare yeah which is
really rare and this starts to be the
basis it's not sufficient right but it
starts to be the basis of a human life
that doesn't drive addiction as a way to
deal with the emptiness right remove the
emptiness and then the need to run from
it goes away
it's interesting how as you were talking
about the the social media persona and
the profile because I've owned a company
for nine years and it's it's a company
and has its own identity and then myself
and my partner were the drivers or the
face of that company at a certain point
but then we sort of phased out as we've
gone in our own separate career paths
and things and mine's gone away from
fashion so I I really enjoy the process
of building a brand and a personality
and you know coming up with your core
values in the mission and like it's a
thing it's a living entity which is been
amazing but I really struggled when I
started the podcast and
decided to get out of you know having
this identity as a fashion stylist and a
musician and all the things that I was
so identified with before that I don't
just ran their course or weren't my true
hearts passion and so I decided to do
this podcast and make this brand called
Luke story you know I have this thing
the life stylist and you know I really
had a hard time with launching it
there's about two years ago because I
didn't know how real I wanted to be or
that I would have the courage to be and
how forth coming and just transparent
and authentic I wanted to be about my
past and my struggles with addiction and
just current struggles and everything
and so I I kind of paused for a moment
before I put anything out until I really
was sure that I was willing to accept a
possible rejection or other consequences
of just being me and I've done this
social experiment now for about a year
and a half where I've just pushed my my
own boundaries of transparency and
authenticity just to see what would
happen if I am in fact disliked or
rejected or abandoned or ostracized by
the world at large or what we call the
following or a fan base or listeners or
whatever and it's been so Buzard I've
been talking about this a lot the more
goofy and real and just true I can be
like treating social media and my
outward facing persona and brand like
I'm in a 12-step meeting and just like
hey this is the I'm going through a
certain degree of you know prudence I
guess you know I don't you don't want to
be lose your tact you know what I mean
but I'm finding this spiritual explosion
of growth and just allowing myself to
finally be seen and to really accept
myself and love myself and what's so
weird about it and this is just this
cosmic joke that I'm just constantly
giggling that is that I actually get
more approval from showing these aspects
of myself that I've always hidden
because I was embarrassed about or you
know my insecurities my struggles it's
like actually people liked me more for
the things that I've been afraid for
them to see my whole entire life it's
like this
strange paradox which on the other side
of it I have lived that that will decide
you were describing is like Armand it
present things in a certain way so that
I'm likes I'm sure that's there to some
degree but I've kind of flipped that on
its head and just like alright how
myself can I be and what point at which
the people all right dear too much we're
abandoning you we actually don't like
you which is that sort of you know
primal egoic fear and I'm just having
such a great time like using social
media actually as a tool to make myself
uncomfortably vulnerable and then to
find that it was a boogeyman it's like a
phantom fear who gives a if they
like you or not it's like if you have
that self-worth which I'm really
starting to cultivate more actively than
I don't know even the response doesn't
matter but it's fascinating when the
response is positive to think that I
would think like oh god now people are
really gonna think I'm an idiot or
whatever you know just letting that be
seen on a on a macro more public level
and then it's give me the ability to do
that more as you mentioned the word
intimacy you know just my friends feel
okay I just want to be real I think it's
one of my goals in life is to you know
to some day pass on and if anyone could
say anything just be like at least he
wasn't phony yeah you know it's
like this to be authentic and real
despite whatever false one might have so
so in the world where we have Ubiquiti
loneliness and liquidus depression and
without talking about it everybody knows
that there is a longing for authenticity
right and a longing for intimacy and so
people will respond to that and so
that's awesome right and I love that
you're having that experience with
people and sharing that experience of
people and anyone who wants to share
themselves where there will be a
personal brand that's the only way to go
it doesn't make that life sock and
actually propagate in the world now
there will still be times where there is
something that is less authentic that
sells better and this is where you have
to say okay choosing between two masters
where I don't remember choice you're in
it it's a tricky one sometimes but it's
one to just have continuous awareness of
and vigilance up
so at a certain point I guess you hit a
threshold perhaps where you really have
to start looking at things from
scalability and from having a brand
that's sustainable are you saying that
at a certain point you are faced with
the decision on editing the level of
authenticity and or in our analytics say
this particular market will like this
part of your message but not this part
if you gear it like this you'll scale
significantly right right and understand
this particular hypo normal hyper normal
stimuli will get a lot of people to
respond because addiction that she sells
right so now come back to capitalism for
a minute again the problem of it yeah
the more addicted people are the better
capitalism works GDP goes up with more
addiction right because this is why
there are not salad bars that have the
scale of McDonald's is because if we
make that is addictive as
because we just exploit the hyper normal
stimuli button people will buy it and
have to keep buying it and we do that
with cigarettes we do it and you know
social media this is like you know when
Tristan Harris left Google and started
talking about this and people started
waking up to social media Facebook you
know or platforms of any kind Google
they get paid by how much time I how
many eyeballs been how much time on site
because the marketers are you know the
advertisers are gonna pay for that so
the goal is keep you have as many people
spend as much time on site as possible
now what's actually good for you in your
life is to get the off of the
screen and go interact with people right
right but since we're gonna get paid
more buy more time on site then we're
gonna figure out the most addictive
things to do with the newsfeed that will
keep you clicking and you know paying
attention right as much as possible and
then justify why it's a good thing
because we have to have to do that right
and so then if you look at if you just
you just described a rift in so many of
my relationships you know the woman
classic like what do you oh you have to
be on Instagram like all day I'm like
hey this is my work like yeah that's
always my excuse
it's part of my job you know it's a it's
an interesting thing because the studies
keep rolling out of the more time people
spend on screens and more depressed they
are and
for a gazillion reasons right right is
there for the most part there isn't any
real intimacy authenticity etc and those
interactions if so it's the tiniest
fragment of the total time spent and
even to the degree there is the real
kinesthetic feedback of intimacy with
another person is not happening this
doesn't mean there aren't good sides of
course the ability to have people talk
with people in other parts of the world
and be able to have messages that are
valuable be shared has value those will
be the parts that we solely focus on if
we have a profit stream associated with
it because we need to justify that right
this is where it becomes important to
really look at what is meaningful now
come back for a moment to the individual
optimization right biohacking individual
conversation we're interested in people
optimizing as individuals so that they
have more capacity to actually do things
that are meaningful because when people
look at climate change and they look at
species extinction and they look at
refugee issues and etc they're like
I don't know what to do with that go
back on Facebook let's go back to work
list but for the and again back to
education they're waiting for somebody
to tell them what to do and do a good
job at it as opposed to be able to self
assess in a very complex scenario what
might actually be effective because if
anybody knew it'd be happening
right it's a self assess what needs to
be done and then to actually start to
initiate and and do that and self author
so individual optimization for that
purpose is meaningful but it's
interesting how the pursuit of happiness
is core to the mission statement of our
country right and the pursuit of
happiness is a is an oxymoron it's a
misnomer because when one is pursuing
happiness they will definitely not be
happy yeah you're inherently
dissatisfied if you're seeking yeah
they're affirming their emptiness lack
of happiness and they're in a
fundamentally narcissistic pursuit and
happiness occurs when you let the
narcissism go and actually connect
meaningfully to the world right and
happiness is mostly this direction about
the stretcher right mostly there yeah
and that also that also unpacks another
piece of the of addiction recovery is
once one has enough stability I mean
kind of the whole point of this then go
help the next person that comes along
that is struggling in ways in which you
have and then that's that's
the magic happens like that's when the
lights turn on when you make a
difference right yeah
and it's not just because now you're
affirming the principles to yourself and
so you want to live them it's that but
it's also because now your life actually
has a sense of meaning exactly where it
doesn't need a hit from something else
as much yeah exactly yeah and I think
yeah I figured that out pretty early on
into my recovery which was almost 21
years ago like the first time I was even
just together enough to have a car and
give some kid a ride you know and just
be of service in that was like God I was
experiencing the helpers hi and then
even know it and now to have the ability
to do that on a on a more broad scale of
having a podcast and making these videos
and talking to people like you and and
the and getting feedback although it's
not you know a true connection but like
a direct message or a Facebook message
like oh my god I've struggled with X Y &
Z and I've been listening to your show
and now I'm getting over it I mean it's
like well okay my life has meaning and
purpose finally and not to say that
being a plumber or working construction
or working at a gas station or whatever
wouldn't as well because you know
there's people needed in all these
different areas but to do the thing that
I really love to do it's been so
fulfilling and it directly helped people
on a on a really deep level so god man
oh that's funny I was just gonna like
touch on like just sprinkle on a couple
of things that we went into and yeah I
have a feeling we're not I'm gonna have
to be coming down a lot of field if
you'll have me because there's many
conversations that need to the need to
happen but I definitely want to get into
you know neuro hacker collective what
you guys are doing qualia just getting
now that we sort of created a framework
and a reason that someone would want to
optimize themself as other than just
like coal now I can get more stuff for
myself and be happier for myself but to
actually you know be a piece of biology
and consciousness that can go out into
the world and have some discernment in
terms of what I want to put my energy
into or not so how did neuro hacker
collective come to be and what are you
guys all about for those that are
unfamiliar yeah so there's a few
founders and they all had the
interesting different stories that kind
of came together all sure
so I was running a think tank that was
working on the types of issues were
talking about social issues how do we
actually have civilization
self-organized well and so one of the
things we noticed pretty easy to notice
is that all the problems we want to
solve or problems that are caused by
human action whether we're looking at
species extinction or climate change or
female general mutilation or war like
this or human behavior mod topics right
so how do we support humans to behave in
ways that are good for themselves and
good for the whole simultaneously
without directly or indirectly causing
harm so then it's the question is what
are all the things that influence in
behavior obviously we talked about
economics if a particular action is
incentive it's pretty hard to prevent it
right so how do we create an economic
system where the whale is not worth more
dead than it is live if we don't want to
have any whales that's a waving topic
right how do we create you know social
systems and tech influences our behavior
our environment influence our behavior
our psychology our worldview our
definition of what is fundamentally
meaningful to does but our biology also
influences our behavior and everybody
who has ever had a pretty significant
sickness or even just had their hormones
out of balance or a hangover knows that
your physiology can go into a state that
affects your psychology and your
cognitive capacity and disposition
significantly where if your
neurotransmitters are off or your
hormones are off ur etc in a particular
way accessing gratitude or happiness or
hope it might be very very hard and
staying out of anger frustration etc
might be very hard and that's gonna
affect behavioral not only their own
suffering but also behavioral
predispositions same with complex
thinking I've actually got to be able to
have a decent working memory to be able
to hold multiple perspectives at once
and synthesize them if I don't have
enough working memory to hold multiple
perspectives at the same time I'll
default into a simplistic perspective so
right which is why I'm malnourished
people are so easy to brainwash right
that is a part of it yeah and and so the
you know the thing we started looking at
there is how does physiology affect
human predisposition not just their own
experience but how likely they are to
behave violently or behave charitably
psychopathy empathy you know
types of dynamics and also the ability
to understand complex things the
emotional resilience to hang in with
them in difficult times and
understanding more about mind brain
interface there's a bi-directional
interface both influenced each other as
we're looking at the way the brain and
the physiology affect the mind right the
emotion and the cognitive dimensions we
it's not just a genetic like oh you're
you have a genetic predisposition for
psychopathy therefore your psychopathy
typically the genetic predispositions
for a psychiatric thing are our genes
that do something like process a
specific nutrient right like well we'll
look at psychiatric issues from genes
that process the methylation of a B
vitamin or the excretion of a mineral
like copper and zinc or something and so
if those nutrients are necessary for a
specific type of brain function like
empathy or impulse control and they're
not being processed well then you might
not be able to have impulse control and
what we actually can do about it is
without changing your genome just
actually say oh the gene that would code
for the transform of this vitamin isn't
happening we can just give the post
transform version of the vitamin and
that mental illness is actually better
so this is the kind of field of
Integrative Psychiatry
psychopharmacology and I started seeing
how many of the dynamics that address
the world have a physiologic component
to them and starting to look at could we
up regulate the neural networks that
mediate empathy
they've mediate impulse control that
mediate emotional resilience that
mediate complex thinking that mediate a
sense of agency so the human bio
Hardware was not only predisposed to
feel better but also predisposed to have
increased capacity and behave in ways
that are fundamentally more you know
pro-social which just does correspond
with healthier to right and it's
interesting because we're evolving in a
social environment healthy people are
pro-social right think about a
psychopath in a tribe doesn't make it
very well right they're gonna get killed
or taken out of the tribe or they're
gonna get better but they don't actually
get to be in a social deep social
environment without pro-social behavior
and work and so neuro hacker started for
me with a deep exploration into
understanding how we can affect human
physiology in ways that decreases
suffering increases capacity and
positive disposition
the first product we launched qualia was
one of many and this next year a bunch
of the additional ones are coming out in
race oh cool oh I'm excited and there
was I want to get into the quality thing
because people I get a lot of inquiries
about it and I'm I'm so into it but well
we'll go into that side a little as a
framework but I definitely want to cover
the X it's exciting so in a world where
we have so much distraction from all of
the things going off from social media
on the phone and etc with so much hyper
competitive pressure to try and produce
almost everyone has a pretty strong
sense of pressure to want to be able to
focus better and to be able to have more
sustained attention and get done
while having a pretty significant
challenge doing that and not only the
you know focus issues like from
distraction but insufficient nutrients
that are necessary certain kinds of
toxic exposure that effects the brain
you know etc so so we see this ramp in
energy drinks so more and more caffeine
and in smart drug usage and and so with
smart drugs in particular which in
Contra distinction to brain nutrients
for things you would just get from a
normal healthy diet but we probably
don't get enough because if depleted
topsoil and whatever else right and
those are just nutrients it in our
evolutionary environment were necessary
for brain function no we also didn't try
to do 12 hours of productive work it was
cognitive per day him and evolution
environment so we're using nutrients
differently so we might have an
increased nutrient need we've obviously
got radically decreased time soil
density interesting right so going on
and collecting acorns for a couple hours
that they are hunting for rabbits or
whatever it's quite different from
sitting down and solving the complex
problems that we are in this
technological age so whoo interesting
you know deficiencies pretty rampant
different kinds of toxicity like you
know just the volatile organic compounds
in this paint and this carpet are you
know there's hundreds of VOCs in the air
that were breathing just normal stuff
right little own industrial pollution in
the atmosphere and in and glyphosate in
agriculture and whatever else and
they're almost all either carcinogens or
neurotoxins or endocrine
doctors and like it's a significant
issue so we've basically as as tool
builders we've built a world that we're
not adapted for and so how do we deal
with that we were looking at the
cognitive issues one of the first ones
there many we looked at you know issues
related to anxiety and depression and
pain and addiction and sleep and those
are all things we'll talk about but you
know we saw this meteoric rise of energy
drinks so they're doing 15 billion
dollars domestically pretty of you know
300 milligrams of caffeine at a time and
God knows what else man
anytime I see someone drinking one of
those things and just like me cuz you
everyone someone in a 7-eleven I'll just
pick something up not like I'm gonna buy
it I just read the ingredients out of
just morbid curiosity I'm like oh my god
it's like so toxic man so you know the
artificial flavors sweeteners colors are
not adding to brain health dude and in
just the what you think when you go buy
a drink is the water it's fluoridated
tap water in most cases that's really
the bulk of what you're getting and when
you buy a 12 ounce whatever drink you're
drinking a bunch of tap water you've got
you know that kind of rise then you see
with smart drugs obviously we have a lot
of people on prescription adderall well
be a trend by vans modafinil for
psychiatric disorders for cognitive
disorders and there's a pretty big
question about what percentage of those
actual prescription cases are good for
people I'm stating that conservatively
but then we have all the people on
off-label right use which is not even
prescribed they're just black market you
know universities midterm and final
adderall sales everywhere right and even
well be trimmed up for now lots of
different things and so estimate is
something like fifteen billion dollars a
year
also in off-label smart drug sales
something like 5 billion in that role
and they work right like they work for a
very narrow set of metrics so if I want
to focus get my midterm done or my tech
startup or whatever it is the
dopaminergic dynamics from the adderall
are gonna make me focus better and have
more motivation and more Drive now some
of the interesting things that we find
is because it's just modifying dopamine
and not looking at acetylcholine and
what how its involved in memory not
looking at good
main looking at all the rest of neuro
chemistry and not even looking at all of
the dopamine process just typically one
small part that one's synthetic
molecules overhead you get certain
effects on certain side effects and
certain missing effects right so we get
increased focus but we don't get
increased memory we actually get
decreased memory of certain kinds that
are all decreased creativity and then
decreased empathy increased anxiety
aggressiveness sometimes
depersonalization D realization
decreased task switching you know etc
these are really important things so and
because even insofar as we're affecting
dopamine
we're just overriding a regulatory
system providing a whole bunch of an
insane chemical not actually saying how
does this system regulate its own
dopamine and how can we support it to do
that then we're gonna create dependence
and addiction and so these were the
things that I saw was a scaling amount
of dependence and addiction and very
narrow positives with a lot of the
positives that were necessary missing
and meaningful side-effects so the
question in that space we worked with
people in a in an integrative medical
clinical environment to when we had
their genomics we had their blood labs
we had brain scans to customize
chemistry that helped them tremendously
so we knew we could do that and then
question was can we do that at scale
without personalization which I didn't
know because personalization is a big
deal and we're working towards methods
to build a personalized there are some
things that I just won't do widely cuz
they have to be personalized they're so
different person-to-person so right
right we don't have any type of folate
or folic acid because whether someone
should be on a methylated or a non
methylate well it makes such a really
big difference there we just don't talk
with that access if we can't personalize
that yeah but there are a lot of axes
that everyone who is self selecting into
a particular kind of thing like
something for cognitive enhancement do
pretty well across the whole board so
you know high success and well tolerated
so what we wanted to do with quality was
say can we make an alternative so that
people don't have to go to just
tremendous amounts of caffeine or
off-label smart drugs or just suffer
without the ability to focus they will
actually help them in what they're
looking for
with enough subjective effect that they
actually feel it and that will actually
have a much wider host of positive
effects that we're getting
focus and concentration and drive but
also emotional resilience and
task-switching and creativity and
analysis and synthesis and you know so
we started by doing a a kind of
cognitive map of what are all of the
states and all of the capacities that
people are looking for when they're
really wanting to do productive work and
then saying what are the underlying
physiologic pathways that mediate those
that we know about from the various
neuro scientific and bio science fields
and then can we understand how those
systems work so how does the body
regulate dopamine so you know as you
start to look at it you say alright so
protein comes in dietarily gets broken
down to amino acids phenylalanine
converts into tyrosine converts to M
acetyl tyrosine converts to l dopa
crosses the blood-brain barrier converts
to dopamine in a presynaptic neuron
transport a protein down an axon crosses
the synapse has to get by synaptic
enzymes that will break it down in
different ways hydroxyl a's and mao b
and comt and etc and then goes into one
of a few dopamine receptors
there's inner cellular dynamics that are
involved so you just start to look at
that and say how does the body do this
thing on its own and are there
deficiencies in any of those key
nutrients or transform factors or things
that are oftentimes under fully
supported that we can support and that
would be just looking at dopamine right
then you do that with acetylcholine then
you look at glutamate then you look at
functions like neurogenesis but is
continuously developing new neurons are
there things that actually support
increased neurogenesis or neuro at
Offutt G killing old neurons better so
you don't have senescence so we looked
at what are the host of things people
are looking for there are healthy states
and capacities what is the underlying
physiology involved how does that
physiology naturally regulate and what
what what might we be able to do to
support the natural regulatory systems
so that people both have a more complete
positive State and that rather than
create dependence right there on it for
a while we overrode their regulatory
system and now there's addiction that it
actually is supporting the robustness of
the regulatory system so that when they
get off it there is elevation from
baseline that lasts right the exact
opposite side effect in the exact
opposite of dependence so that was our
goal and
so we did hundreds of iterations a bunch
of testing you know after doing full
litter to review database of 500 no
tropic chemicals and looking at the
pathways of them and then looking at
positive synergies negative synergies
delivery mechanisms and we ended up
getting to this formula
you know that's there right now which
over a large enough number of people
over a large enough amount of time
tested well enough that we were actually
really happy with it and so that's that
first product and that the goal there
was to be able to support people having
increased productive capacity rate
increased cognitive clarity and the
associated emotional states like
resilience and and drive that was
actually not bad for people and good for
people now I can't claim that we know
that because we haven't done long enough
term trials with enough metrics with
enough controls to claim all that but
you know we've done pre clinical trials
with pre and post brain scans and
biometrics and seen you know really
meaningful statistical correlation and
change and we've had forty thousand
people over three years
we're collecting data from what their
experiences and so we we're very happy
about that and that's the first product
and you know what what it kind of is is
a complex approach because our brain is
a complex system bodies a complex system
so rather than here's one molecule to
overwrite it it's how does it
self-regulate and can we support it
self-regulation across many related axes
now if we were gonna approach anxiety we
would do it the same way if we were
gonna approach pain rather than you know
just some end set or opiate we would do
it the same way how does the body
naturally produce its own opiates how
does it naturally deal with inflammation
how does it and can we support those
dynamics if we were gonna work with
sleep we go to the same way so those are
the Americans that are gonna mean I feel
like I can't wait to feel you guys are
coming up with next so there's a couple
of things in there that I really like is
that you guys really were very
thoughtful about the synergy between the
different compounds I think there's a
lot of cowboys and Indians right now in
the nootropics phases I'm sure you're
aware where you see the same kind of
formulations on 10 different products
and it's like one guy just
what the next guys doing on the label oh
yeah here that's good for short-term
memory focus cognition whatever blah
blah and they just kind of throw those
stacks out there without necessarily for
thought as to how those interact with
one another right so you have one
molecule and it does one thing and let's
just even say that that that effect of
that molecule is universal and you're
choosing ones that are kind of
universally affecting people in the same
way but then you combine that with other
molecules another ones another one
tonight you have something totally
different you have a third party
compound now right and so that can go
well or not based on self
experimentation there's been times where
I've taken too many different things at
the same time and too much of them and
I'm having the opposite effect where I
can't focus and I'm actually feel like
I'm freaking nuts because I took too
many smart drugs or whatever but I think
what's cool about qualia is that you've
really looked at how things relate to
one another that you're not putting
anything in there that's gonna cause
your body to down regulate its own
production we're to the point where
there's a dependency and oh my god now I
can't make this neurotransmitter or
whatever because I've been done for me
for so long and then also that the whole
basis of it is coming from what I like
about the company itself is that it's
coming from this intention that we're
trying to create people with biology
that runs better so there'll be better
people I mean to me that makes total
sense I had to flew a couple of months
ago and I was in Colorado and I had to
speak at two events and they were pretty
substantial for me and I was so sick
dude and I could not make myself be in a
good mood like I literally just couldn't
be happy you know just I was just
depressed and even though my mind was
right and I wasn't fighting it I wasn't
like caught in some sort of negative
spiral that wasn't actually negative at
all I just wasn't in a good mood I
didn't feel happy like I do right now so
I wasn't firing on all cylinders you
know so I really think that you do have
to approach your own development from
all sides in other words I can't be
eating you know glyphosate and aspartame
and all this evil things that they put
in food and just think I can meditate my
way into a higher consciousness while
I'm destroying my biology in the same
way I can't become obsessed with herbs
and
super foods and nootropics and then be
running around flipping people off in
traffic caught in my trauma issues you
know it's like you have to kind of
approach it from all angles so I like
that you're not like hey you guys let's
make a cool vitamin that makes people
better at computer work it's like now we
have a larger scope of vision which is
really cool now back to the qualia it's
been interesting to observe the friends
that I've turned on to it and you know
listeners of the show and stuff like
that is that I haven't I've yet to have
anyone say that they had a negative
experience as a result where with a lot
of other nootropics people say that it's
too stimulating or it made them tired
made them like this made them like that
so I've had no one report back like oh
my god I felt horrible
and only a couple people that were like
man I don't really notice anything yeah
so the majority of people that I've
interacted with it of tried are like oh
my god this is the best thing ever like
what where has this been my whole life
like an overwhelmingly positive
experience and that's what it's been
like for me too which is one of the
reasons I wanted to track you down and I
found that there was so much more to
your story than just being like you know
a guy that knows about nootropics but
for me what's been interesting
speaking of especially the the
down-regulation piece is that when I
started I took the full dose I think it
was three of number one and six of
number two and I did that a lot and it
kind of just brought me up to a nice
base level and then at a certain point
that became a little too stimulating and
now I'm like I take one number one to
number two and I'm like I feel great
there's no need to even push it beyond
that so it actually has the opposite
effect of building up a tolerance say
right that was intended yeah so good job
on that because with most other things
you take it and you take it and you
build up a tolerance you need more and
more and then your body forgets how to
make it and you end up in this imbalance
but I think that there's just something
really cool about what you've done I'm
gonna come back to the problems of
capitalism for a minute yeah every MBA
student learns one of the first
principles of businesses maximize
lifetime revenue of a customer okay so
you guys are blowing it cuz now I'm like
I need to I was on auto
quale because i was pounding so much a
bit and now I'm like actually I'm
getting too many shipments I had to stop
that and just order when I run out
because I'm gonna run out it's so you
guys might your business model is going
against that degree so going so you
think about it from Sam a pharma company
and their MBAs that are looking at the
financial instruments and making
decisions right I mean at the financial
metrics and spreadsheets and and saying
okay maximize lifetime revenue of a
customer the things that treat symptoms
forever so we say depression is not
curable you have a biochemical imbalance
which is like some magic term
biochemical models what the cause
of it right genetic it's just just a
magic term for we don't know where we
haven't bothered to look at it and in
depth and so we have to symptomatically
treat that forever heart disease always
symptomatically treat that forever
cholesterol we're gonna treat it
all of them right so that's very good
from a lifetime revenue point of view
and if it creates side effects that need
other drugs to resolve them that's
called a cross seller and uh perfect
okay and then if to maximize lifetime
value I want to start them as young as
possible so we make up new diseases like
a VD after we put to the ritalin shitty
desks and do this don't make those desks
like they have yeah seventies yeah those
little wooden prisons okay so we get
them started as early as possible on an
iatrogenic cycle right so pretty much
everything that happens in medicine we
wanted to do the opposite if it causes
addiction we want to create a long-term
benefit it because the side effects
won't the side effects to be
comprehensively positive if the people
have to stay on it we want them to be
able get off of it right that like
that's the goal and so really theory of
market should not apply to medicine
because people really can't choose to
not participate with something that will
make them better if they're sick and
since they really can't choose not to do
that theory of markets as a up
thing just like there shouldn't be
for-profit prisons right and so this was
hard for us because in his why we
started with supplement as opposed to
bigger things we could have done is
because I didn't want to take capital
from any financial service places that
would then bind us to doing things or
unethical so like our right our cost of
goods to make qualia is marked
than most men tropics retail and it's
because if you want to use the right
form right you use the phosphorylated
version of this and the methylated
version of this and etc and with the
right concentration of the dose you
knows you take nine capsules
yeah but and that's not filler it's
because it just takes that much of those
things it's just expensive no and also
the fact that you guys aren't using
excipient sand binders and all that
weird stuff which I always notice right
away I'm like I read go to that end of
the label and a suddenly I got that
there it is which means that you can't
work with almost any manufacturers
because that's what they need to make it
work in their machine it's a magnesium
stearate and all this stuff right so all
all of that like doing the integrity
thing is just a hard thing to make work
fiscally but like you have found with
your podcast if you do there will be
people that are attracted to that thing
and it can grow so that's what we're
kind of it we'll be right back after
this important announcement okay check
this out I recently launched something
on my site called the master market it's
a supercool store where I've got
different categories whether it be
spirituality mind focus outdoors food
super foods supplements bedroom sleep
office jetlag biohacking there's even a
book store from some of my favorite
books and books recommended by my guest
and what this is is like a hub where you
can go find all of the links to
everything I've either used and vetted
or I'm currently using in my life to
build the ultimate lifestyle so it's
called the master market Luke's
lifestyle list and you can find it at
Luke's story com forward slash store
just go to my site and you'll see it in
the navigation now what's really cool
about this is when you make a purchase
through my store I'm not actually
selling you anything I'm just curating a
really dope place where you can go find
the best stuff so I get a piece of
commission if you make a sale through
the site the vendor of course makes some
cash because you buy and you get a place
where you can go and save time and money
from not having to look around for the
best stuff and do all the research
yourself but what's even cooler is most
of those items come with a custom
discount code if you go through my site
which is pretty cool so it's a
win-win-win triple trifecta win great
way to support my work and the podcast
and the show as well as the brands and
your own health and well-being check it
out Luke's story com forward slash store
and now
back to the interview so in terms of the
other things that people typically use I
want to just run run a couple of these
by you because I take my qualia I guess
about five days a week and as I said
it's been strange that my dosage has
gone down it must be fixing me that's
the way I look at it like it's it's
connecting synapses or something that
were off and now they're they're getting
more in alignment the way I look at it
but there's other things to that
depending on where I'm going what I'm
doing I find to be useful so today for
example I knew that I was gonna have a
very social day I'm going to be talking
to you I'm being interviewed on the way
back home after this so I did a number
of different things one of them being
phenibut for example which I'll maybe do
once a week or something like that and I
just find it's just a really great
social lubricant and and also took some
for asset amp because I find that it
really helps me with speech some of
these other things I'll do but I could
give Joe here piracetam and it'll give
him anxiety yeah or he won't notice
anything alright give someone else I
gave a girlfriend once phenibut and she
probably took a little bit too much but
she got deathly ill you know and on what
I would take for this it's like a
sprinkle to me to her she was a bit
smaller and just had this huge adverse
reaction same thing I'm a daffodils
another one that I really like and for
me I take an eighth a dose of modafinil
for me is an eighth of one tablet so
it's like a 200 milligram tablet once I
took a half I was like oh my god I feel
like I'm on crystal meth not fun a
quarter if I'm really really tired set
me straight but if I just want to have a
productive day and be relatively alert
just a tiny tiny little piece which is
about an eighth of a tablet does me I've
given it to friends I take man be
careful this is a this is a drug this is
not an herb let go easy they take a half
so like I didn't feel anything they take
another half they're like me I didn't
notice anything like oh my god if I took
a whole modafinil
I would be like you know scrubbing the
freaking bathroom floor with the
toothbrush I mean I would be tweaking so
hard so what's up with some of those
lair you mentioned Deborah no I was on
like low-dose Debra no for a while I
have tried a lot of different things
outside of the safe and more plant-based
stuff that you guys work with in qualia
what are some of the other ones are even
micro dosing on psilocybin like that
whole other world of smart drugs and
nootropics what you got to say about any
of that
sure let's make some categories here so
we've got
smart drugs as a category which are
pharmaceuticals that are usually being
used for an off-label purpose they're
oftentimes psych meds like wellbutrin or
adderall or they are narcolepsy meds
like modafinil or they are sometimes
anti Parkinson's meds
Deborah Nell you know right every when I
was taking that stuff because I was like
what is that it's no big deal it's for
Parkinson's
how does micro dosing it now all of
those are dopamine are dicks right so
for different purposes they dopaminergic
s-- you'll have some like for
Alzheimer's don't have to say all that
work with this is that all those urges
mean they raise dopamine okay
no wonder I like all of those yes so
you've got you know various types of
smart drugs is one category most of the
time those are gonna have a pretty
strong effect and a pretty decent chance
of side-effect if used improperly
there's really nothing that is gonna be
all that dangerous if used properly but
properly is the big thing right like
whether we're talking I mean you can use
heroin not dangerously if you if you use
it properly but that's like not how
people use use heroin and specifically
adderall is and feta mean right it's a
DM feta mean you add a methyl group to
it you have methamphetamine
methamphetamine used to be a
pharmaceutical and so like the
distinction between pharmaceuticals and
illegal drugs is where the legal
categorization of the minute happens to
be based on lobbying not based on much
else so you've got smart drugs as a
category and in general people should
explore there if they are well educated
if they're like if they really educate
themselves well about the topic and they
and they're really paying attention in a
quantified self kind of way to the
and they should not be looking at doing
that super regularly now there are
exceptions
so Deborah Nell for instance works
through mao-b inhibition so mao-b
is a enzyme in this synapse that breaks
down certain neurotransmitters like
dopamine like other catecholamines like
phenethylamines so if you inhibit the
mao-b those neurotransmitters will bit
across the synapse more into the
postsynaptic neuron this can be very
dangerous because if you take that with
anything that is also increasing mono
aunt means going those types of
neurotransmitters going into the sand up
specifically ones it should be broken
down by mao-b they can get to to higher
level so one wants to be careful with
that and what would be some things that
you with Deborah know for example that
you wouldn't want to combine with that
at all
interesting and that doesn't mean nobody
does it and has a good experience
everyone the daffodil now they're
different modafinil we don't know all
the mechanisms of modafinil that well it
is the least symptomatic dopaminergic
for the most part for most people it
seems like it works through transporter
proteins largely which is gonna be a
little bit less tricky than many of the
other mechanisms but if if you are
flooding the synapse with dopamine and
not breaking it down you can get to
dangerously high levels right and not
everyone has to high mao be genetically
some people's mao be is too low they
actually feel anxious because they have
too many of those excitatory
neurotransmitters and never know what
makes them feel terrible but there are a
lot of people who are genetically /
producers of mao-b and they will have
certain kinds of depression tendencies
because their transmitters are just not
getting across the synapse that well and
if they take something that's just
increasing their level of dopamine they
might feel better but it's actually not
doing the right part of the mechanism
right in the right part of the pathway
what's going on for them if they
actually break down the excessive levels
of mao be that they're genetically
producing and there's other things that
can cause i male bee to go up other than
just genetics it's inducible and so as
people age mao-b goes up dopamine goes
down it's a part of Aging which is why
deborah knows one of the
few drugs it is actually correlated to
be a life extension agent and there are
people who when they're young wouldn't
do well with it when they're older they
would because they're mao-b levels went
from a healthy place where it would
imbalance them to being excessive in now
balances them so different oh can
actually be therapeutic for some people
for other people it'll be an enhancement
that they shouldn't do regularly so to
the degree you're getting into stronger
tools you should have more education
just like in any field right like
playing with the skill soft rather than
the hand saw you kind of need to learn a
little bit more because there's more the
consequence but you can also do cooler
stuff of it so for us empowered
responsibility and self education is a
really key thing because we want people
to be empowered in their own health and
not just feel like a victim and waiting
for someone to tell them what to do who
has no way of knowing what their own
experiences are spending enough time
even if it's a well-educated doctor they
wear their physical structure only
allows them to spend five minutes of
time like they just can't apply what
they learn that well right so smart
drugs is one category research chemicals
is another category where you have a
bunch of chemicals that are not actually
categorized as a drug they're also not
categorized as a nutraceutical they are
for research purposes only and they live
in that kind of regulatory Bardo and
that's most of the know tropics they
like the rest the Tamsin winter the rasa
Thames are in that category in the end
the AMPA Keynes those are the kind of
two primary categories that people get
into but then also the NSI 189 the p21
the cerebral Ison the lots of the
phenibut right they live in that
research chemical category and some of
those are basically smart drugs that
just didn't go through approval but and
then some of them are more what we'd
call a formal no tropic which is
something that can increase some aspect
of cognitive performance without
meaningful side effect most mark drugs
will have some side effect unless it
happens to be one this therapeutic for
you and then we've also got brain
nutrients which are just the amino acids
fatty acids vitamins minerals that the
brain needs to function well that are
often deficient and then you've got
botanicals and you know plants that
modulate different things in different
botanicals can be very powerful right
you can you can get l-dopa from mucuna
which is a Parkinson's med in different
dose right it's not the same kind of
dose but
you can get very potent botanicals so
all those categories of things to play
with and of course as people really get
into bio hacking and neuro hacking
become well-educated you've got
different delivery mechanisms people do
to them setting this or I am or IV or
snort stuff intranasal or you know
whatever right so there's a big
interesting field and some of them can
also be not just cognitive enhancing for
normal well-being but very therapeutic
if someone is dealing with a post TBI
situation something that is neurogenic
that enhance the development of new
neurons after they had some micro brain
damage can be very helpful there's a
whole lot to learn so one of the things
we're working on is really competent
education and you know community space
so that people can learn this well right
now it's forums on reddit and you know
places like that where people come here
and really have to sort if the NB a-- is
good or not yeah it's it's funny now to
with the algorithms online search
results are very skewed oftentimes like
I was looking for something a couple
days ago that was something political is
a little bit conspiratorial I think I
was researching the number of times CNN
has been busted for lying and producing
fake news I googled like how much how
many times the CNN had caught doing fake
news in 2007 something like that and I
phrased it a few different ways and
nothing came up you know you can't find
an article if you use Google to find
that for example and it's the same way
when you start looking for some of this
stuff you'll read something on a forum
and you're like okay this guy says this
about modafinil or fun of it or whatever
and then literally you get to the next
ten sites and it's the same exact copy
you know that some other Schmo has like
copy and pasted into his blog or some
other forum you're like wait they're all
getting the same you know five talking
points from the same place so even if
you are a good researcher sometimes it's
hard to come up with original valid data
just because it doesn't exist you know
like you said with some of these things
that are in that grey zone in terms of
their categorization it's it's sometimes
it's difficult to even educate yourself
because you don't know what's - let me
give you a classic example we had a
scenario where people had questions
about a central phenoxy and safe and
because even on some very
good know tropic sites that says central
phenoxy my cuts birth damaged birth
defects and because entrancing converts
a dmae which is a cholinergic coding
donor and there were some studies that
showed dmae causing birth defects and
rats now people do their research to say
well you should avoid that you know in
that scenario
now it's I should get into it if we get
out of if we really look at the rat
studies and we say what kind of dosage
to what administration is it relevant to
normal dosage no the it's nothing in a
normal oral dosage range was there at
all it was it was even close dmae
actually became approved as a drug
without that being a concern in many
different countries and then central
Phenix seen never had any birth defects
studies and so yet that's all over the
web central don't do it because of
birthday thank you no we pulled every
single study ever done on central
phenoxy inflicted 586 studies most of
which weren't online we had to go to
medical libraries find them in other
countries and other languages right
because they they were started the
research better than the 50 so they just
would never put online translate them
all and then we had a few PhDs in neural
chemistry
neuroanatomy etc do a structured
literate review meta-analysis of all
that for us to come up with our opinion
on central you know there's not a
trivial thing to do but it matters if
you really don't know what's going on so
i like the wild west of the space
because people are starting to take more
responsibility rather than just wait for
the doctor tell them what to do and they
get mad at the doctor when it doesn't
work yeah
when the doctor couldn't possibly spend
enough time with them or keep up-to-date
with all the research happening but I
really do long for higher quality
control and it's one of the things we're
working on and we can only work on it as
fast as we can afford without moving
into fiscal models that suck which is
the tricky part but like neuro tech you
know we were talking about different
devices that we have around the house
and pmf and etc it's pretty easy to say
this seems compelling let's share it
well what we're working to do right now
is with all the types of neuro tech
whether we're talking about low-level
laser therapy and transcranial
intranasal lasers or we're talking about
PMF or TMS or you know whatever right
for us it's
the process of doing the full letter to
review on everything that's known about
this where who what things does it
affect what things does it not affect
safe etc and then doing full research on
the actual products and say does this
product have the specifications that the
literature shows are useful and then
curate those things so we're building a
platform to do that it's just a
non-trivial process and the same with
just curating knowledge on nootropics is
in the forum you've got like some real
gems and then a bunch of and it's
not gonna say obvious which ones are the
gems and the same like if you look
in the bodybuilder world you go to the
steroid forums some of the smartest
endocrinologists anywhere are in there
and then there's just so much dumb bro
science in there okay that's like okay
but if you don't know the field well
they're all sand you don't know
right so this is something that we're
really working to do is to have a
moderation process where everything that
goes there is better than that's cool
man that's cool that's that's a really
valuable resource because I that's the
excite you know another positive thing
about right now is that I think more
people are waking up to the fact that
they don't actually have to rely on the
allopathic medical system like I have
episodes and I call them things like
learning to become your own doctor you
know it's like you really can do a lot
on your own and then if you're if you
are tied into someone good in functional
medicine and they're able to kind of you
know be a step above you in terms of
their body and knowledge but like with
my relationship to medicine is I do a
lot of my own research and footwork and
order my own labs and geek out and like
which labs are the best and most updated
because even my functional medicine
doctor they're still in the labs that
were the best GI test last year I'm like
no man and the biohacking community
there's new labs with you know new
parameters and things like that and I
really feel the sense of power and
autonomy because I'm you know I know my
limitations in terms of my body of
knowledge and what I made capable of
kind of understanding or care to take
the time to learn when it comes to my
biology but I know what I know and then
I go to the experts that are higher up
the food chain and in their area of
special specialization right so it's
really cool that that you guys are
thinking that far ahead and enabling
people to help
themselves one of the parts I'm most
excited about is a integrative medical
functional medical program so we've got
a number of doctors who are kind of the
best integrative psychiatrists that I'm
aware of and well psychiatrists or just
functional medicine that does second or
pharmacology and so you know we're not
allowed to provide medical information
prescribe diagnose treat anything like
that right so if people and if someone
is on has psychic conditions or on
psyche memories that don't use our stuff
because as there's real interactions
that need to be factored but we don't
want to just say go to your doctor if
your doctor doesn't know anything we
want to provide better resources so go
to your doctor and the hero doctors that
actually know the field really well they
can run a qejy on you they can run
neural hormones they can run your Walsh
metabolic labs they can run your gut
brain access they can look at your
genomics etc and actually do the the
best of what functional brain chemistry
optimization currently looks like and so
that's something that we'll be rolling
out in this next year and we've been
already working with another that's
amazing that's amazing yeah because you
do need that that middleman you know
you're just a freakin genius and you
have the time and energy to devote to
yourself but I think each one of us can
only take it to a certain level and we
need you know we need that help but it's
like how do you find a good one I always
get the question of who's the best
functional medicine doctor and I'm just
I just made it easy on myself after
working with a number of them
individually and I just joined parsley
house which is like a you know sort of I
think if it's the uber of functional
medicine just a modern interface and a
membership model rather than paying per
visit and and I find it to be really
effective because they can deal with my
insurance in the billing and they know
how to code the labs and stuff but it's
still very much self-directed like I
could just follow their program probably
be healthy but I'm always digging deeper
so I'll do you know three different
tests for metals where they might just
order me the pre and post challenged
urine test I'm like oh that gives me a
certain metric but just hair analysis
there's blood there's other ways you can
dive into that but it's helpful to have
someone you trust that'll go along with
what you're doing because
in the Western medicine model I go into
the general practitioner and be like hey
I have XY and Z wrong they send me out
to a number of specialists that are
their cronies and it's like you get
stuck in that whole thing and I'm going
in there telling them about some new
supplement or technology and the doctors
like what I don't even know about dad
you know like the Liao's having some
problems with like vertigo and dizziness
and I you know went up the the ladder in
LA medical system which i think is
probably a pretty good place to live if
you want some you know high-level
medical care and I got sent to the you
know the world's best EMT that people
travel from all over the world I go sit
down with this guy said yeah man I don't
know man I have you know I have a little
hearing loss over here it's about 20%
I'm well aware that but I had this thing
where I'm getting dizzy all the time and
I always feel carsick and he ran some
tests for me I came in again he goes
yeah I think you probably should just
not drink coffee I think it's the the
caffeine can do that like really this is
what you guys this the best you guys can
do is that the caffeine isn't making me
you know it was just like oh my god I
could have done a much better job of
being my own doctor and of course I you
know finding finding the root of that
but it's a cool time to be alive where
those of us that are waking up and have
access to information like you guys are
providing can really take responsibility
well and not become this dependent
infant on the teeth of Western medicine
and all the inherent expenses and things
that come along with that and it's
really important to keep the Pareto
principle in mind which is it does get
complex quickly and to be able to
synthesize the complexity is a really
deep topic and the foundations are still
80% of it and the foundations are not
that hard right I mean they might be
hard to do from a discipline point of
view in the life that is conditioned
otherwise but if someone is not sleeping
enough sleeping well and sleeping enough
everything else they'll do is just tiny
diminishing returns in comparison to
sleepy enough right right and if someone
is not exercising and if they're not
generally eating well and if they're not
doing some kinds of stress management
and mental processes then biohacking is
actually a way to support living
shittily right
trying to like symptom manage the fact
that their life actually sucks right and
that's just not the way to go right and
so if someone really just does the
foundational stuff it's amazing how much
of it that addresses and even like I say
we look at heavy metals so I can do a
pre and post provocation test and I can
test with the MPs or DMS a or EDTA and
I'm gonna get different specific
bindings and I can look at hair labs
which will give me a different timescale
of what's being excreted and I can look
at you know metal antibodies tens ending
and then what I'm gonna find is okay
there are specific chelation or binders
that I'm going to use differentially if
it's lead versus mercury right or
gadolinium or whatever it is that's a
lot to figure out it's a lot of expense
and if I just put the person in a sauna
every day and I gave them chlorella in
the morning that would be 80% as good
okay right yeah and so it's just kind of
important like one of the things we want
people to know is that there are
foundational things that if they don't
have the time money proclivity will
really help them be radically healthier
and then optimization on top of that
that's nice right yeah that's that's
well stated sometimes they'll find
myself taking a 50 pills in the morning
trying to turn my brain on and then I
realized maybe if I hadn't gone to bed
at 2:00 a.m. and woken up at 7:30 you
know so that's that's very true some of
those things are just basic lifestyle
choices if you eat if you think about it
if you're gonna eat food in its measured
in pounds and it's all nutrients right
that's all talks in our nutrient and
then you're gonna take supplements that
are measured in grams
the supplement the word supplement means
to supplement that what you're getting
from diet right like getting the pounds
right as a big deal right and
similarly with sleep like when you
exercise all that torn muscle that it
needs to repair is gonna be repairing
during sleep during delta ii particular
all those nutrients that need to go into
new tissues are gonna do that during
sleep and so if you're not sleeping
enough like all those stuff just kind of
doesn't matter that much and so this is
one of the places where i want to
empower people in the face of the
complexity to
you know that there is a simplicity that
is most of it which is if you live a
life that is relatively closer to an
evolutionary environment evolutionary
life you'll just do a lot better and
then all the other stuff if you're sick
you definitely want to go find good
functional practitioners and if you
really want to optimize you want to go
yeah
I'll said I love it man I've got about
in the interest of time we're right
around the two-hour mark which is I try
to cap any conversation off no matter
how much more there is to do but I have
my notes for part two I'd love to uh sit
down and have another talk with you I
mean every time every like every time
you have an answer to a question twenty
more questions populate I'm just like a
stifling more that have come about so
we're definitely gonna have to talk
again but I really appreciate your
perspective I'd love to talk again this
is fun and yeah it's just fascinating
dude you just you're you're so full of
information I mean you really are just
the fascinating guy was all pumping
people up on the Instagram on the way to
have like guys really smart you guys you
know you know I'm not stroking her ego
it's just you are it's the thing that
you and I were talking about is that
people are actually fascinated by life
without being broken right right and
they can restore that if they were
broken and if you just spend your life
following things you're fascinated about
you will tend to learn things right I
want to know what's up next with neuro
hacker collective you mentioned the
functional medicine kind of interface
thing can you reveal yet what your next
supplement or product is going to be
we've got about ten products that have
already tested well in the prototype
phase of different types that we'll be
going through you know final refinement
and trials and like that before being
released we're actually hiring right now
for additional formulators and VP of
Product and etc and researchers to come
help because as we're scaling it needs
more work to be able to do it as at the
speed we want to so we will not produce
any product that is to treat any medical
condition cannot do that right that's a
medical thing but things that support
sleep things that support
healthy sensory process meaning if there
are sources of chronic pain that chronic
pain is not loving people things that
help support natural calmness which is
not saying anti-anxiety thing but is
yeah nothing I guess I think our
audience is able to read between the
lines all of those I find that I dance
around terminology so much on this show
and the interest of protecting my guests
that happened to produce a different
product or service so those are things
that will be coming soon we have a new
version of qualia also that is just a
single step less total pills oh well and
right now is testing as effectively so
we spent a year refining it alone now
early this next year so even a handful
of new products in the nutraceutical
mind brain health space then curating
neuro tech across those platforms I mean
all types of neuro tech with a proper
scientific vetting creation platform and
then the doctor program are the things
that I'm really most exciting awesome
when you say neuro tract tech are you
talking about
lasers and light devices and magnetism
and all this kind of stuff oh cool
that's interesting those of you
listening that aren't seeing the videos
I walked into Daniels home here it's a
beautiful home it's a gigantic house
it's a lot of big rooms it's lovely but
in every everywhere I look I see some
biohacking tool or something there's big
amethyst crystals everywhere there's a
tsamina bed right in front of me and a
bulletproof sleep induction mat and
earth pulse essential oils in the air I
mean it's like it's just so in alignment
with my lifestyle what are some of the
neuro enhancing or just life enhancing
technologies that you're digging right
now personally mm-hmm some of the ones
that I appreciate a lot that are like
consumer neuro tech they're not still in
R&D I'm a big fan like everybody else's
of red light and so companies like juve
and buy light and other ones that
they're working on intranasal
transcranial whole-body near infrared
and visible infrared and we wouldn't
need that if we just been a fan of Sun
right but if you don't spend enough time
in the Sun it is removed from normal
indoor lighting because it's the
that makes it expensive yeah who uses
that more energy to make warm light
right so rather than do the whole house
you just do your body with your clothes
off and ran it we photosynthesize
molecules like plants do not as many as
plants plants or all surface area
photosynthesis well not that much
surface hair but we it's a meaningful
part so we know that the Bloor and UV
into the spectrum helps us with vitamin
D and the way that it does vitamin D
synthesis is different than all really
supplementing vitamin D so there's
meaningfulness there but nitric oxide is
also photo synthesized from exposure to
light and ATP specifically is
upregulated mitochondria output of ATP
is upregulated from the red end of the
spectrum and so up regulating ATP output
is kind of just good for everything
right this Gerrans increased cellular
energy to do whatever the cells are
doing so that's what I like and I do
like transcranial and intranasal
applications especially where there is
TBI or tinnitus or things there where
you don't quite know how to address it
specifically but interesting because I
do the nei the V light the eight ten
nanometers near-infrared it's yet
invisible right
I used that when I used to have the one
that was six something it was very red
it lit up the whole front of her face
which I just like that for a fact I
don't know which one does what and then
I do the jus and I love both of those as
well
like seriously when but here's the thing
I also get a lot of Sun my vitamin D
levels are off the chart I still
supplement with it here's one thing that
I wanted to get your opinion and I
always say okay it's the end of the
interview and that it goes on for
another hour but in all seriousness with
the spectrum of light because I do
sungazing have been doing that for years
grounding all in the Sun gazing when the
Sun rises or goes down I get full naked
Sun as much as possible so I'm getting a
lot of the natural spectrums I limit
blue light at night like pretty hardcore
in the home when it gets dark outside it
also gets amber and red inside like I'm
dialing that in my sleeps great
circadian rhythm but when it comes to
the spectrums of sunlight you know
different people might have different
opinions on this but based on being a 47
year old guy and knowing what the sky
looks like normally with planes in it or
playing
not in it there is unequivocally some
geo-engineering
going on on the planet and I think
anyone that doesn't acknowledge that to
some degree mike has serious
psychological issues having you know
looked up in the sky and not seen weird
clouds and the formations and stuff we
have now there's definitely something
going on which is of course a different
conversation but with the weather
manipulation of what's being going on in
the sky I often wonder because it does
have parently something to do with
reflecting the sun's you know radiation
back out into space to cool the planet
wherever the fuck's going on but the
temperature of the light and the
spectrum of light is being altered in an
unnatural way from whatever's being done
in our skies do you think that that's
having you know an effect on our biology
just aside from whatever toxins might we
might be breathing in with just the
actual nature of light itself of course
very short answer to a long question so
geoengineering is an approach to us
recognizing that we're very close to
positive feedback loops on certain
climate change dynamics and people freak
out and rather freak out says well we
need to actually get the temperature
down because even before the acid is
killing the coral from ocean
acidification from co2 diffusing into
the water as carbonic acid even before
the trophic cascades are killing the
coral from the large fish die-off
from overfishing the temperature is the
main thing driving them into bleaching
and hypometabolism they can't stay in
that place very long most of the
photosynthesis of the world happens in
the oceans and a lot of it depends on
the coral and the positive feedback loop
on the albedo cycle at the caps like so
it's like whoa we need to get
temperature down so the idea of let's
just reflect 20% of sunlight by putting
particles never atmosphere that will
reflect 20% sunlight is the same exact
approach as our cholesterol so I use a
statin mm8 it is a it's addressing the
symptom in a way that will then have
effects that are negative for other
parts of it because we're scared of the
symptom without understanding what
caused it and addressing it at a college
level so of course what we should be
focused on is how do we just increase
photosynthesis for sequester
and decrease emissions and what has to
happen to be able to do that at what
scale in time but yeah it's very
interesting allopathic medicine is
looking at individual metrics that we've
correlated to something and how do we
exogenously override that individual
metric without looking at what brought
it about to be that way so complex
multifactorial dynamics we suck out
which is why we don't have a single cure
for any chronic illness we can cut
cancers out radiate amount poison amount
we can't make them stop growing and
understand why they grow in terms of
current medicine same with psychiatric
illnesses
same with neuro degenerative same with
autoimmune because they don't have a
single cause we're actually awesome at a
to cause issues right right right
if it's an acute injury or an acute
infection or an acute toxicity that's
really straightforward and we know how
to treat that thing but if it is
anything other than a cute single cause
that we kind of suck at it right now
because it requires a different approach
to science of this complexity approach
which also requires a different fiscal
model and a different IP structure and a
whole bunch of things we approach the
world the same way our approach to
climate change to starvation to whatever
is to tweak something to affect that
thing here without addressing the
underlying dynamics it may be that
almost always geoengineering is like
allopathic medicine it is a statin to
the environment yeah that's that's funny
man and definitely it's affecting the
light going back to like your you know
your top devices a lot of the stuff
that's coming out another thing that's
really effective is ways to sort of use
technology to mimic nature in a sense
and that's how I think about an infrared
sauna or cryotherapy I mean any of the
things that I do is quote unquote bio
hacks are grounding you know using
earthing technology pmf all this stuff
it's all really just trying to create
that homeostatic experience of being the
sentient being on planet earth in its
natural state but we're not in a natural
state including the light spectrum
that's coming at us from the Sun like
you can't even get what you would have
gotten 100 years ago yeah true our main
bio hacks are actually just putting us
back in something closer to an
evolutionary environment so our air
filter right is not making special air
it's just making less primary right
I thought that you have one over there
to have them in every room yeah and our
water filters are also still not as good
as spring water right do you have a
pristine hydro filter they don't have a
precise they're there in Laguna Beach
you know not far from here but I've done
a lot of research on the filters and I'm
gonna interview that guy but I think if
I had to have a filter he'd probably be
the guy he vortexes the water he puts
magnesium bicarbonate silica back in it
I mean he's like it's like making spring
water out of municipal water it's crazy
but anyway but you know whether we're
changing our weather we're pulling
toxins out of the environment or like
you know it's mentioning the BOC here
actually it's not releasing much because
I used the AFM safe coat
oh no and safe coats another biohack
that i think is awesome if you have a
place that's new carpet or new paint or
you're going to paint or install things
the non-toxic products that if it makes
a really good no way cool that is going
in the show notes but yeah I mean so
much of it is just recreating
Evolutionary of iron which there's like
so many people who are ill go like move
to or visit some more rural natural
place and they get better right and so
that's a lot of it and then there's a
course advanced shed that is not just
doing that yeah what are the weather
kind of tricks you got up your sleeve
that I haven't been observed walking by
tech wise well qejy based neurofeedback
is awesome
mmm and whether you're doing alpha theta
training or SMR training or Delta
training should be based off your qejy
and someone knows how knows how to do
that well I don't know if you've ever
went to peak brain since she's living
there all the time yeah but Enders good
yeah andrew is good I interviewed him
here yeah on the show and I was on his
show - yeah brilliant guy so that's a
great therapy right now
I mean TMS is actually interesting it's
it's early but it's interesting for many
things or it's TMS transcranial magnetic
stimulation is profoundly interesting in
the early studies at University of
Arizona and some Japanese universities
in curing Alzheimer's
I'm through a very novel proposed
mechanism involving microtubules but
it's too early to really know what it's
doing so there's a number of high-tech
methods that are really cool and
specifically there's also
some of the most high-tech ones are are
actually still evolutionary Merriman
ones like the cutting edge of microbiome
X is mostly that the vaginal flora and
the breast milk of indigenous people who
were never exposed to chlorinated water
and antibiotics and glyphosate have a
whole bunch of bacteria that we just
don't have in probiotics anywhere else
that are actually part of our
evolutionary environment that are the
most significant factors for epigenetic
modulation we're genome so that's very
cutting edge right understanding of
epigenetics and microbiome mix right and
it is also saying oh evolution actually
kind of makes sense hey our fecal
implants from clean you know a clean
source so to speak so we have a chunk of
working microbial mix we're working on
right now though I'm we're not that
close yet because of what we want to do
but I'm excited about it cool I will say
obviously we didn't get into
psychedelics and entheogens
no I have a whole section on that yeah
and we didn't get into any of the
psycho-emotional psycho-spiritual work
right but on the jist evolutionary
vironment not I will make a thought in
closing is just like a statin is
optimizing for one thing right lower
your cholesterol without looking at hey
is the cholesterol maybe protecting the
arterial system from oxidative damage
and that's not a good idea or what's the
whole rest of the story going on when we
optimize for something that is affecting
a lot of other things and we're not
paying attention we get extra knowledge
right which is also called side effect
we built the entire world the human
built world for a few purposes and ways
that affected a lot of other things so
we build a house to protect us from the
elements and give us a safe place to be
and then maybe for a certain aspects of
aesthetics but we didn't pay attention
to oh well there's actually chemistry
that's in the paint that is affecting us
and oh yeah the fungicides that are in
there that are making fungicide
resistant funguses that are why we have
an issue with mold Minh never did before
oh that that actually is an important
thing like in the drywall paint so in
the paint in the 70s started having
fungicides added resist mold so then the
mold became super MRSA mold okay that's
insane so the reason everyone has mold
issues when we lived with mold forever
very environment is because this is
mutant mold oh my god so but even sons
like you know the the color and angle
right all of these end up affecting the
the psyche this field of environmental
Sykes Alegre if you're in an area where
there's graffiti and trash on the ground
in the walls this kind of environmental
psych studies been done many times if if
you just paint over the graffiti and
clean up the trash violent crime drops
like 30 to 50 percent Wow and it's
because you think about what the
environments transmitting runnier there
is one this is a wasteland and I'm in
survival mode and to this is a place
where law doesn't operate mmm-hmm right
cuz yeah as I've been broken and they're
not rectified right and as soon as you
fix those things how violent human
beings are is being changed at the like
50 percent level by an environmental
psyche right I've heard David Hawkins
talk about that he called it the broken
window theory you know you have a
building in the ghetto and it gets
ignored and then someone breaks the
window and then someone comes along
breaks another window then comes the
goofy then the drug dealers on the
corner and ever I never thought about
the kind of mechanics of it that's very
interesting it's I guess the it's like
the level of consciousness of anything
could you say would you frame it in that
way I would say that's a way of reducing
the complexity of it right um which is
kind of my thing I interview people like
year ago to squish that down into a
bite-sized thought but if I mean so if
you go into a cathedral they're doing
environmental psych and so the sound and
the smell and the visual and every
aspect of the sensory process is
designed to uplift and exalt it but then
specifically that it's narrow and very
high has a certain effect that's
different than if it was wide and high
or if it was not high right which is
you're very focused on up and so then
you feel very small and you can both
have a sense of feeling you know and
then the priest is halfway between you
and where Jesus is up there and where
God is
and so both if you want look at the
cynical side of the this is how you make
a good authority Rhian kind of dynamic
where everybody feels small and
Authority up there but also the
beautiful the mystical side of people
feeling a sense of all and exaltation
okay the environmental psychology of how
those buildings are done induced state
right just like Burning Man induce a
state because of the environment even if
you don't period so what we are
realizing is that we have built a world
that we are not well adapted to all
right and that's affecting us in a lot
of ways that we didn't pay attention to
that are mostly not good for us and so
there is this task that you and it's not
good for the planet right and it's not
good for us so there's this task of how
do we rebuild the entire physical built
world in a way where the goal the
primary goal is not you know it being
inexpensive or fast or aesthetically
beautiful those are all partial goals
the primary goal is that it is
enlightening the humans that are
inhabiting it how do you create a built
worlds it makes the healthiest most
enlightened most pro-social human beings
that are inhabiting it and how do we
rebuild the entire world of that in mind
in in relationship to you know harmony
with the ecosystem so that's the biohack
that is most interesting to me that's
amazing dude I love that really good way
to sum it up
alright so closing question who have
been three teachers or teachings that
have influenced your work like who have
you learned from that we might go up and
learn from as well specifically more
related to individual health or is
anything anything totally bribed could
be a book teacher philosophy relative
and preferably something that one could
go look up or we can put in the show
nuts you know Meister Fuller
whatever even Buckminster Fuller would
definitely be at the top of the list and
either operating manual for spaceship
earth or critical path being the most
approachable books on understanding
state of the world and how to think and
how to design so that would be very high
on the list and then ordering three is
impossible for me so I'll just worry the
ones that came to mind first yeah yeah
that's the idea
finite and infinite games by James cars'
is a great book it's a book that will
help you understand both the future of
economics the future of worldview and
very deep spiritual principles together
from a game theoretic perspective it's a
small easy read oh cool
is a great one and then the next one
came to mind was Anthony de Mello was
actually
Jesuit priest but was someone who
studied all the world religions and
traditions and spent less time in India
a little book called the way to love and
I mean a little book and principles of
sovereignty what does it mean to
actually be whole and to be able to love
from a place of wholeness rather than
this commodities exchange we usually
call love of what do I have to give
someone to get the security and
reassurance and validation I'm looking
for and how will I punish them if they
don't do what I want all right
but because there is really no such
thing as being able to really love
someone which means to see them and want
for them if you need them to be
something because you can't see them if
you need them to be something else right
and you can't walk for them if what's in
their highest good isn't been meeting
your needs so loving from a place of
wholeness it's a great little boat ham
that sounds awesome I'll just forget all
right great thank you so much well
that's there's so much more research to
do now well thank you so much for
joining where would you like to send
people in terms of website social media
any of that yeah two things as if if
people are interested to learn more
about what neural hackers doing easy
no hacker calm if people are interested
more in some of the larger social topics
the economics education etc I have a
blog at civilization emerging calm and
you can go checks about that awesome
great we'll put those those links in the
show notes for those of you listening
and you want the show notes for every
episode please remember you can go to
Luke's story com forward slash
newsletter and to your email and we'll
send it to you
so thank you so much for joining me here
I look for you
[Music]
yoyoyo listeners near and far what's
happening how was that conversation huh
quite a mind-blower if I don't say so
myself I already look forward to part
two because as you can see even after
two hours we barely scratched the
surface of the dimensions that we can
expand into with Daniel schmuck and
Berger what a fascinating guy what a
cool guy I love this dude right when we
were done I really was like okay when
can we do this again like I'm just gonna
drive back to LA get a couple night's
sleep come back let's roll he lives down
there San Diego so it's quite a drive
but I'm so glad I got to do this one in
person and more than anything I'm so
glad that you got to join me for the
second show of 2018 I'd like to remind
you that I do this show every Tuesday
folks and even sometimes twice a week
but definitely Tuesday next week I want
you to do yourself a huge favor and
check in again when I interview a Leon
Zak from a place called the womb Center
in New York City and we talked all about
consciousness sound breath work
psychedelics it is a super trippy dive
just like this one into the realm of
consciousness and it is amazing it's
I've won I've been sitting on for a
couple months and I'm like I got to put
this out it's too good so that's gonna
be a two-parter next week to ensure that
you don't miss that episode or any
episodes to follow you can make it
really easy on yourself by just clicking
subscribe on this podcast on your
podcast player iTunes wherever you're
listening to this just subscribe dog
super easy it's all you got to do then
every week don't go Inc delink
lifestyles podcast right on your device
you don't have to think about anything
you're gonna get the goods for free ZZZ
another thing that I want to let you
know is the shows also on Spotify now
really cool thing that happened is one
of my goals in 2017 nailed it
it's on Spotify it's a really great
interface you can listen to the show to
your heart's content over there also
want to invite you to join me on
Instagram that is of course my social
media of choice if you want to see me
doing all the crazy stuff that I talk
about on this show you definitely want
to follow my Instagram stories my
feed you know I don't know it's all
right I'm not a professional
photographer I do the best I can I wish
it was prettier you know your feed could
be really nice mine's
okay I'd say but I think my stories are
pretty awesome I humbly I humbly declare
that because they go away in 24 hours so
I don't give a if I look totally
spastic and mental so I do a lot of
really goofy yet I think in entertaining
and in educational things on the stories
for all the supplements and lifestyle
hacks and all the stuff so you can
follow my adventures on Instagram
stories if you want to take it to the
next level though and you really want to
be part of this community above for you
to join our Facebook group I just
started a private Facebook group for the
life stylist podcast our guests and our
listeners and that is where I answer
questions and do Facebook lives I do all
kinds of exclusive exclusive content
over there and so come hang out all you
have to do to find us in Facebook is
just going to the search bar put the
life stylist podcast and you will find
the group asked to join will let you in
and we'll keep you in as long as you
behave yourself all right so thank you
so so much for listening to this show
and for sharing it with friends I really
really appreciate your ears and again a
Happy New Year let's make 2018 the best
ever don't forget to come join me this
Friday night January 19th at one taste
Venice where we are going to be doing
breathwork
chakra balancing talking about
connection intimacy orgasm sex
meditation consciousness and all sorts
of rad stuff so go to Luke's story com
forward slash events to get in again
that's this Friday January 19th at one
taste Venice go to Luke's story calm
forward-slash events to get your ticket
[Music]