all right so this is my queerness video
copy in to grips with the fact I'm queer
alerting
I'm covering it in my own personality I
was in this school which was like a
business school for hippies how to start
a social enterprise how to and we met a
few times a week it was the first time I
had had people surrounding me who truly
understood what it was like I felt like
I could show up have a disability and
not be seen as less than that I was
figuring out my identity but I was
forget my identity and that piece and it
was the first time I encountered people
who identified as something other than
the binary genders and it broke my brain
both because grammatically I had a
really hard time getting my mind around
they/them pronouns not wanting to accept
it but just grammatically I was like I
don't understand where I use it and I
don't understand I was translating
constantly from heat I mean they she I
mean they and and they had to kind of
put up with it for it for that period of
my life because that was what I was
capable of in the moment and I did I
tried my hardest but my hardest was
constantly failing at it and then I had
friends who went through who were in the
same class as me who after the class
ended up changing their pronouns to
today them and that was even more
difficult because I had known them as as
different ones and so I messed up even
more with with their pronouns and they
were even more gracious about it
so I'm very grateful for that but there
was something he wasn't just the
pronouns which was a grammatical thing
and just a language and I have
difficulty with language but it was
encountering people who were non-binary
for the first time made me question how
differently I treat the binary I didn't
know which box to put them in I didn't
know whether they were men and I should
treat them as men or they were women and
I should treat them as women and it made
me uncomfortable to think that was even
the case like wait do I really treat men
and women that differently yes yes I do
especially as a heterosexual female
identified at the time so that was like
the beginning of my what I've lovingly
referred to as the gender of going
into this space of like wait how much of
me resonates with this gender and
realizing that for for trans women in
particular there was something about
which there was something about the fact
that somebody could be labeled as male
have the body that is labeled as male
and reside yet identify so strongly with
being a woman there's like I don't
 care what you think I'm a woman
and I never felt that struggling there
was the only reason I felt I was woman
it's because I had the body like I got
the parts I don't my woman check that
box and so I had no problem with
allowing trans women into the womanhood
cuz I was like if you feel that strongly
that you're willing to check that box I
don't even feel that strongly I'm
willing to check that box and that was
more important it was like the inner
being I was like I don't have none of
that
and so it also made me question looking
back like how much of Who I am is trying
to be a woman thinking I should be
feminine to attract a man think I should
be these things that I don't feel feel
like I'm failing at being a woman in
like it just made me question everything
and it was the beginning of accepting
Who I am not caring whether I'm feminine
or masculine not caring which box I
check just being and I probably would
identify as dawn by I do identify some
binary and gender identify as a female
that is non-binary and but I go by
she/her because the pronouns break my
brain so I will I will honor it for
other people but for me I'm like no she
heard just works better for for Who I am
I don't
know what to say but there was four
minutes in I don't gonna get to the
other I guess this is a just gender and
so they'll be queer part 1 and queer
part 2 so yeah and I also know how
tumultuous and hard this journey was
internally for me that I get why people
aren't willing to go on the gender
journey that it hurts them at a soul
level it breaks their brain to have
other people walking around on binary
because they don't know which box to put
them in and they probably don't even
know how to articulate that there's just
like this wrongness about it and we have
to be able to hold that tension of like
both of those things is true we have to
as a society go through the gender
and it's a hard thing to do and we
cannot require it of other people both
simultaneously and so everyone kind of
has to do it in their own time is the
conclusions I have come to and they're
not the true conclusions they're my
conclusions and so this is part one of
queerness thank you