howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
hey this is Jim rut and this is the Jim
rut show our guest today has been
virtual one of the world's leading
figures in the effort to achieve
artificial intelligence and the human
level and beyond what is often called
artificial general intelligence or AGI a
term that been coined we will likely use
the term AGI a lot today when we are
referring to AI at a fully human level
and beyond in addition to being a
researcher and prolific author Ben is
the leader of the open cobb open-source
AGI software framework and he's the CEO
of singularity net a distributed network
that lets anyone create share and
monetize AI services at scale welcome
back hey Jim thanks for having me yeah
great to have you maybe we could start
remember our audience while a
intelligent and well-read audience isn't
necessarily an expert audience and AI
could you tell us what AGI is and how it
differs from narrow AI and why the
emergence of AGI is so significant yeah
when the AI field began in the middle of
the last century the basic informally
understood goal with Street intelligence
of kind of the same type that people had
then during the next few decades it was
discovered that was possible to create
software hardware systems doing
particular things that seemed very
intelligent when people did them but
doing these things in a very different
way from how people did them and doing
them in a much more you know narrowly
defined way so I mean in the 50s it
wasn't clear that you know would make
sense to make a program that could play
chess as well as a grandmaster but
didn't approach it anything like a
grandmaster did and couldn't play you
know Scrabble or checkers at all without
some reprogramming so the existence of
these narrow a eyes that do particular
intelligence seeming things in narrowly
defined ways very different from our
human suitum I mean this was it was
really a major discovery which is quite
interesting and it's left us in a
situation now that I think of as a
narrow AI revolution where we have a
astounding variety of systems that can
do particular very intelligent seeming
things yet they're not doing anything
like how people did it and as part of
that difference from our people did it
you know they're not able to generalize
they're intelligent function beyond the
very narrow class of contacts and so I
introduced the term AG AI artificial
general intelligence 15 years ago or so
with a view toward distinguishing
between a eyes that are very good at
doing tasks that seem very narrow in the
context of ordinary human life versus a
eyes that are capable of achieving
intelligence at least with the same your
generality of contexts that people can
other terms like transfer learning and
lifelong learning live arisen in the AI
community have closely related meanings
because I mean to achieve general
intelligence you need to be able to
transfer knowledge from one domain to a
domain that's qualitatively different
from a human view from the domains you
were you know program for or or trained
for and you know it's important to
understand humans are not the maximally
generally intelligent system I mean from
the standpoint of computability Theory
Marcus withers they're universal I I
sort of articulates whether fully
mathematically general intelligence
would be like we're definitely not that
like if you if you give a human in based
around and 275 dimensions they'll
probably do a very bad way so we're not
a good at generalizing beyond for
example the dimensionality of the
physical universe that we live in so
we're we're not maximally general by any
means we're very narrow compared to some
systems you can imagine but we're very
general compared to the AI systems that
are in commercial use right now so I
think as a research goal it's worth
thinking about how do we make a eyes
that are at least as generally
intelligent as humans ultimately more
generally intelligent and it's an open
question to what extent you can get to
human-level AGI my sort of incrementally
improving current style narrow AI
systems versus needing some
substantially new approach to get to
higher levels of AGI well with all the
various contending approaches out there
is there a rough estimate either in the
community or your own or both on when we
might expect to see you know human level
general intelligence my stock answer to
that in recent times has been five to
thirty years from now and I'd say in the
AI community there's a fair percent of
people who agree with that but you'll
get a range of estimates aiming from
five or ten years up through hundreds of
years and there are very few serious AI
researchers who think it will never
happen but there are some who think a
digital computer just can't achieve
human-level general intelligence because
the human brain is a quantum computer or
a quantum gravity computer or something
but if if you set aside the small
minority of researchers who think the
human brain
you know fundamentally relies on some
trends Turing computing for its general
intelligence setting aside those guys
for the moment you have estimates that
are you know 10 30 50 70 100 years not a
lot better another 500 years and I'd say
during the last 10 years
the mean and variance of these estimates
have gone way down so I mean 10 or 20
years ago there was a small percent of
researchers who thought AGI was 10 to 20
years off a few thought was 50 years off
a lot and thought it was a couple
hundred years off now from what I've
seen substantial plurality probably a
decent majority think it's coming in the
next century so I I remain on the
optimistic end but the trend has been in
direction of me rather than in the
direction of AGI pessimists that's
interesting our last guest on the Jim
run show was Robin Hanson and we talked
a lot about AGI via upload or emulation
of a human directly scanning their
neural system their connectome and
representing that on earth in a computer
it seems to me that one could at least
at one level divide AGI approaches into
uploads slash emulations and software
approaches to just maybe speak a little
bit about your thoughts on those two
broadly different ways of achieving AGI
I think right now the idea of achieving
AGI via an upload or emulation of the
human brain is really just an idea I
mean it's an idea that seems to be
scientifically feasible according to the
known laws of physics but there's really
no one working directly on that there
are people working on supporting
technologies that could eventually lead
you to be able to scan the brain Acula
enough that you could start seriously
working on that but right now we just
don't have the brain scanning tech to
scan the mind out of a living brain and
we don't have the reconstructive tech to
take a dead brain like freeze it slice
it scan and then reconstruct the
dynamics of that brain I mean in theory
you could do that by the laws of physics
but we're way without speaking of time
estimates and we were very far away in
terms of tools and concepts from being
able to do that right now worse the
attempt to create a GI via software be a
very loosely brain inspired software
like current deep neural nets or more
math and cognitive science inspired
software like OpenCog I mean the
prospect of getting AGI by software this
is a subject of like really concrete
research projects now so it's certainly
much more than an idea I mean it may be
that all these projects
wrongheaded but at least we're directly
working on the problem right now
so I mean conceptually you could divide
AGI into those two approaches but I'd
say those two approaches are there are
very different practical status at the
moment at one point I made when I was
talking with Robin is that the upload
emulation approach is essentially
all-or-nothing
either you can upload him a brain maybe
not a human brain but a full brain and
make it work like it's supposed to or
you can't
while the software world one can see in
fact we obviously are already seeing
lots of incremental benefits and you
know for my experience in the business
world the investment world
I generally guide people away from
trying to jump up a cliff right go from
zero to a hundred in one single project
I don't think that's quite a fair
assessment because I think the missing
link for being able to mind upload
people or simulate people in detail I
mean the missing links are the right
kind of hardware / wetware and on the
other hand the right kind of brain
scanning equipment and I think
incremental approaches toward you know
brain like hardware or wetware and
toward really stretch you too broadly
accurate brain scanning
I think you know those advances would
lead to a lot of amazing incremental
achievements I mean get making advances
and that kind of hardware or wetware
will probably do a lot of funky narrow
machines doing robot control or
perception there's something and
advances in brain scanning would lead to
amazing progress in you know
understanding how the human mind works
and diagnosing diseases the brain and so
on so I think incremental progress in
that direction could be valuable for
reasons other than building AI systems
and you know it might be valuable for
building animal level eyes too right if
you want to build an artificial rodent
or a bug or something then progress is
scanning organisms and emulating them
can be pretty interesting also so I I
don't think that's it
and by any means it's it's super
interesting I just think right now
that's about the research on supporting
technologies rather than about mind
uploading per say a brain emulation per
se yeah I thought you make some good
points and that suggests that we're
likely to see both tracks gradually
attract more and more resources as we
get to it
I would say like brain scanning needs a
breakthrough right it needs a radical
breakthrough in imaging or else a
radical breakthrough in extrapolating
the dynamics of the brain forward giving
a static snapshot and it's not as
obvious that Adi needs a radically
different sort of technology than what
now exists I mean it it might but it's
not obvious as it is for for brain
emulation I think people who aren't
building the technology but who are
speculating about it they like the brain
emulation idea because it's a proof of
principle right it just like the bird is
a proof of principle that a flying
machine can be built out of molecules
but then as we all know that the best
proof of principle isn't always the best
way to build something in nanotech is a
good example that I mean in Derek
Drexler's initial books on nanotech I
mean he was making all these pictures of
gears and pulleys and you know now that
structures have looked like big machines
that we make and that's the right
approach to take if you want to make it
first proof of principle that a nano
machines could exists but now it's
becoming clear the way nanotech is
probably gonna work is a bit more
molecular biology ish but that's a
harder way to work out details in the
proof of principle type way but it may
be a more artful way to actually make
the machines work so I think it's it's
not bad if you're a proof of principle
system ends up totally different than
the system you actually build but of
course also my double earnings interest
and Yas cos were humans right and even
if that's the most awkward way to make
AGI from the perspective of making the
most intelligent possible systems the
fastest or the cheapest I mean from our
particular position as humans like I
would love to have you know a mind
upload of Friedrich Nietzsche or philip
k dick to play ping pong
and of myself for that matter so I don't
have to be stuck in this body forever so
there's there's interesting value to
that apart from how good an AGI approach
it is with my AGI hat on
however yeah I'm more drawn to more
heterogeneous approaches that no
leverage what we know about the
mathematics of cognition and leverage
the current hardware that we have to a
greater extent into the brain emulation
approach can take I mean the current
hardware we have is very little like the
brain unless you did get super high
level loops of abstraction I mean we now
understand a lot about how to do some
types of intelligent activities like
theorem proving or arithmetic or
database lookup way better than the
human brain does so it's interesting to
think about how to create AGI in a way
that leverages this hardware that we
have in this knowledge that we have
while also leveraging what we do know
about how the brain works and that that
leads you to a more opportunistic
approach to AGI where you say well how
can we put together the various
technologies we have now including
brandish and non brandish technologies
to take the best stab at creating an
intelligent system and a system that can
move from no AI + + toward general
intelligence so man you've been working
on the OpenCog project for a number of
years which is an approach to AGI that's
quite different from the deep learning
approach we hear about so much about the
media could you tell us about OpenCog
the history of it and what it is so the
history of OpenCog goes back before
OpenCog I mean it goes back to the
mid-90s when I started thinking about I
could make an AI which was a sort of
agent system that was a society of mind
as Marvin Minsky had described it but
with more of a focus on emergence so
Marvin Minsky viewed the mind the human
mind is an artificial mind there's a
collection of AI agents that each carry
out its own
particular form of intelligence but they
are interacting with each other much
like people in the society interact with
each other within the intelligence came
out the overall society I like this idea
because I like self-organizing systems
and I thought this sort of
self-organizing complex system might be
the right kind of mind like behaviors
but when I dug into it more I realized
Marvin Minsky didn't like emergence and
he doesn't like nonlinear dynamics at
least not in an AI or cognitive science
context whereas I was viewing the
emergent level of dynamics and the
emergence of like overall structures in
the network of agents as being equally
important to be intelligent be
individual agents in the society so I
mean I I tried in the late nineties to
code myself a system called web mind
which will be a bunch of agents
distributed across the internet each of
which you know trying to do its own kind
of intelligent processing and where they
all coordinated together in the way of
yield emergent intelligence we did some
amazing prototyping in the company in
New York I formed web mind incorporated
but then no we failed to make a success
of our business in spite of decent
effort and ran out of money when the.com
boom crash in 2001 and I then started
building a system called the novo
metacognition engine much of which was
eventually open sourced into the open
cog system and I would say open cog and
then the singularity network each of
these reflects different aspects of what
we were trying to do in web mind so web
mind was really a bunch of agents which
was sort of heterogeneous that we're
supposed to cooperate to form an
emergently intelligence system now
OpenCog we tried to control things a lot
more so we have a knowledge graph which
is a weighted labeled hyper graph called
the atom space with particular types of
nodes and links in it particular types
of values attached just some of the
nodes and links such as truth values and
attention values of various sorts then
we have multiple AI algorithms that act
on this out of space you know
dynamically rewriting it and in some
cases watching what each
and helping each other out in that
rewriting process so there's a
problematic logic engine called PLN
probabilistic logic networks it was
described in a book from 2006 or so
there's Moses which is a probabilistic
evolutionary program learning algorithm
that can learn little atom space sub
networks representing executive or
programs there's eke and economic
attention that works that propagates
attention values through this
distributed network of nodes and then
you can use deep neural networks to
recognize perceptual patterns or
patterns and other sorts of data and
then create nodes in this knowledge
graph representing sub networks or
layers in the deep neural networks so
you have all these different AI
algorithms cooperating together on the
same knowledge graph and the concept of
cognitive synergy I coined that term to
refer to the process by which for one a
AI algorithm gets stuck or makes slow
progress and it's learning then the
other AI algorithms can understand
something about where it's got stuck so
understanding something about its
intermediate state and when it was
trying to do and then can intervene to
help make new progress that can can
unstick the a algorithm that got stuck
so if a reasoning engine gets talkative
logical inference maybe evolutionary
learning could come in to introduce some
new creative ideas or perception can
introduce some sensory level metaphors
you know if a deep neural net gets stuck
at recognizing what's in the video it
can refer the reasoning to do some
analogy inference or it could it could
refer to you know evolutionary learning
to brainstorm some creative ideas you
know to make an OpenCog system easy to
do a lot of thinking about how these
different AI algorithms can really
cooperate and help each other
acting concurrently on the same
knowledge store it's different than like
a modular system where you have
different modules inviting different AI
algorithms with a sort of clean API
interface between the modules we don't
have a clean API interface between the
open
modules the design is more than these
different algorithms are cooperating in
real-time on the same dynamic knowledge
graph which is then stored in RAM and
this is a there's some resemblance to
what was called a blackboard system in
the 80s a long time ago but the
blackboard is this dynamic in RAM
weighted labeled hyper graph and the eye
algorithms are all uncertainty savvy and
you know interacting largely on the
level of exchanging probabilities and
probability distribution just has two
different pieces of knowledge and so
that I mean the focus on graphs and
probabilities is different than
blackboard system said we're back
decades ago talking about cognitive
synergy you know I'm thinking that idea
from you guys and thought about it a bit
more real-time dynamic fashion we're not
only can one set of algorithms attempt
to solve a problem that another one is
stuck on but also think about
bi-directional problem-solving for
instance taking from human cognitive or
animal cognitive science it certainly
appears that high level clues flow back
from higher levels of the mind to the
perceptual system for instance when the
perceptual the upper levels the
perceptual stack are trying to identify
an object you know for instance the
scene at a higher level makes more sense
with certain objects than with others
and you know that's something I
generally don't see in most current deep
learning projects but I see OpenCog
being very well structured to do that
kind of real-time dynamic multi-level
processing bi-directional yeah yeah
absolutely I mean the concept of
cognitive synergy was always intended to
be bi-directional and concurrent with
multiple AI algorithms helping each
other out at the same time in cycles and
complex networks and I I tried to
formalize the cognoscenti notion using
of category theory and probability in
the paper at one of the AGI conferences
but I mean that brings you in a whole
direction of mathematical abstraction
the the example he mentioned certainly
is an important one and I'd say and then
there are science analogy current deep
learning networks for vision or audition
probably model well what the human brain
does in less than half a second or so
and when you take longer than that to
perceive something it's often because
you're using cognition in some form to
you know disambiguate or interpret to
bring some background knowledge on
interpreting the perceptual stimuli
that's something current deep neural
Nets don't really try to do I mean of
course you could attempt it in a neural
net architecture by taking in their own
net with a long term declarative memory
and long term episodic memory and like
coach training them in some way with a
perceptual neural network but that's not
something being worked on a lot and
we've been working toward doing that
sort of thing in OpenCog where you have
a symbolic cognitive engine atoms face
and pln and so forth
interacting with a deep neural net for
doing perception we've done some simple
experiments in that regard and there
there's been a lot of tweaking we've had
to do to the OpenCog atom space
framework not so much the added space as
a representational tool but to the
pattern matcher which is a key
operational tool on top of the atom
space so a lot of tweaks we've had to do
the pattern matcher to make it
interactively in real time with deep
neural networks but we're mostly through
that now and I've been doing some
interesting experiments in the direction
you've suggested and I think this can be
valuable in natural language processing
also where I mean we have Bert Ernie
these various even neural net
architectures doing a great job at
recognizing various complex statistical
patterns in natural language text so
that they can then you know emulate
natural language in a way that looks
realistic in the short run yeah
clearly they're not getting the overall
meaning of a document or the deeper
semantics of what's being said but you
can see in the indian meaningless
aspects of their generated text over a
medium tough medium scale of text length
so we've been working on combining deep
neural nets for text analysis with a
more symbolic approach to extracting the
meaning from text so I think I think
this sort of neural symbolic approach to
AI is gonna be very big three or four
years from now because deep neural Nets
in their current form we're gonna run
out of steam I mean there's still more
steam left because you know real-time
analysis of videos and videos with audio
on your mobile phones chip that's not
yet rolled out commercially right so
there's more steps to be followed to
kind of straightforwardly by just
incrementally improving and scaling up
current deep neural nets but I think you
know once enough sensory data processing
has been milked using these deep neural
nets we're gonna hit a bunch of problems
that need more abstraction and I'm
guessing that tweaking deep neural nets
to do abstraction is not gonna be the
step forward now there may be many paths
forward you can perhaps take a multiple
there on that architecture where some of
the neural nets have a totally different
architecture than the current
hierarchical deep neural networks I mean
Google went a little bit in that
direction with differential neural
computers and there's another papers
like that but I'm guessing that in
interfacing and synergizing logic
systems with neural nets it's gonna be a
much less obscure thing in a few years
and what we're already seeing more and
more papers coming out on hybridizing
knowledge graphs with deep neural nets
so once you've done that I mean a logic
engine is a natural way to you know
dynamically update a knowledge graph and
I think you're gonna see more and more
powerful logic engines used on the
knowledge graphs being hybridized with
deep neural nets until people rediscover
that predicate logic and term logic are
interesting ways to manipulate knowledge
graphs and OpenCog may
we'll get there first before others I
mean we're already there in terms of the
design we may well get there first in
terms of having amazing results on
cognitive in heads perception before
others get there by sort of
incrementally having more and more
cognition to their deep neuron that
architectures but whether it comes from
OpenCog successfully integrating deep
neural Nets that's gonna be one way or
the other right we're adding deep neural
Nets onto OpenCog I'm working on using
them to feed knowledge into our logic
engine but the deep neural net guys have
started adding knowledge graphs on to
their neural nets and I'm sure they're
gonna be adding more and more logic ish
operations on to their knowledge graphs
so we're going to see a convergence of
these two approaches and it's going to
lead to you know maybe a convergence to
those two into one approach or maybe
just into a whole family of parallel
approaches each of which is learning
something from each other seems to me
the most likely let's not back a little
bit to something you mentioned in
passing when talking about open cogs
symbolic and sub symbolic working
together we talked to look you talked
quite a bit about cognitively informed
perception but the other to my mind
really big gateway problem that maybe
your approaches are knocking on the door
of is language understanding I look at
how we move from narrow out area I to
near AGI one of the biggest barriers
seems to be real language understanding
whatever that actually means right I
know you guys have done some work on
that could you talk about your thoughts
on language understanding and where your
projects are and maybe a little bit
about where you think other people might
be I think language understanding is
quite critical to the AGI project I
would say probably the most critical
thing that we're working on now toward
AGI is meta-reasoning reasoning about
reasoning but we can come back to that
language understanding is certainly
easier to understand and we have
been working on likely to understand the
anokhin cog for some time and they're
just now playing with hybridizing that
with deep neural nets in various ways so
forth
for syntax parsing I mean we're working
on using a combination of symbolic
pattern recognition and deep neural nets
to guide the symbolic pattern
recognition for automatically learning a
grammar from a large corpus of text and
then to map grammatical parses of
sentences into semantic representations
of those sentences in a framework like
OpenCog which has a native logic
representation as part of its
representational repertoire then this
semantic interpretation task becomes a
matter of learning mappings from parses
of sentences syntax parts of sentences
into logical expressions representing
key aspects of the semantics of the
sentences so I mean semantics is a big
and rich thing the semantics of a
sentence may involve no memories and
episodic memory images that are evoked
to get involve a lot of things but I
believe that I got key and perhaps core
aspect of the semantics of a sentence is
in essence a logic expression or
something you know homomorphic to a
logic expression so you can think of
semantic interpretation as mapping a
syntax parts into a logic expression
plus a bunch of other things like images
episodic memories sounds and so on that
they're sort of linked from or
ornamented on this logic expression so
how do you learn the mapping of syntax
parses into logic expressions that's
sort of part 2 of a language
understanding problem in part 3 that
being pragmatics how do you map the
semantics into the overall broader
context which i think is well treated as
a problem of Association learning and
reasoning in OpenCog we really deal with
the syntax learning tasks
the syntax of semantics mapping learning
tasks
and then the pragmatics learning tasks
in somewhat separate ways although all
using the same underlying repertoire of
AI algorithms and we've been focusing
more on syntax learning recently and
focusing on unsupervised language
acquisition where we're trying to make a
system that automatically learns the
dependency grammar which can then be fed
into the link parser which is a well
known grammar parser out of Carnegie
Mellon University to parse sentences and
we're making decent progress there I
mean it gets better and better each
month we're able to parse more more
sentences with greater and greater
coverage we're not yet at the level of
supervised learning based grammar
parsers that you feed a corpus of
diagram sentences into but one
interesting thing we've been playing
with is if you start with just a little
bit of supervised data not even parse
sentences but start with a little bit of
chunk of parsing in tracing like like
mapping of linked collections of words
in a sentence into semantic relations
not a very small part of your corpus so
if you start with just a little bit of
partial parse information and then use
that to seed your unsupervised learning
you can get much more accurate results
and I think this is interesting because
what well I think unsupervised learning
is a great paradigm I also think we
don't have to be total purists about it
I mean starting with like whole complex
parse sentences like in the pantry bank
parse sentence corpus or something feels
wrong to me but if you can start with
like simpler semantics or syntactic
information about you know ten thousand
sentences or something a very small
percent of the senses you're looking at
maybe that's okay rather than a pure
unsupervised approach and that brings us
into how you learn semantics because one
approach
cymatics is to look at say captioned
images as a desert source because if you
have images with captions I mean then
you can use under on that and they're
all that connected the OpenCog say to
recognize the relationships between
what's in the images and then if you
correlate that with the syntax parses of
the sentences that are captions to the
images then you're connecting what the
sentence is about which is the image
with the syntax structure in in in the
image right so suppose you have you know
ten thousand or a hundred thousand
captioned images and ten million
sentences without captions then you know
if you take the supervised data that
comes from the captured images which is
supervised in the sense that you have
some semantics there in the images which
is correlate with those sentences and
then the unsupervised data of all the
other senses in your corpus now if you
can make something work from that that's
also very interesting perhaps just as
interesting as pure unsupervised grammar
learning right so we're we're playing
with both of these approaches pure
unsupervised grammar reduction and then
grammar induction where you have a small
percent of your sentence corpus which
has links into something non non
grammatical and that's I mean that's
sort of how people do it right we have
some senses that we had a non linguistic
corrala - and then a lot of senses that
we don't have a non linguistic koyla -
but we have to figure it out and do the
semantic interpretation yeah I was gonna
say that we have an existence proof that
in the one existence proof we have the
language learning is a mixture of
supervised and unsupervised right how a
child learns you know they are babbling
away and random initially and then they
get feedback mom smiles when you say ba
for instance right and as people have
done more and more research there's
clearly a lot of feedback
it's an existence proof or cross modal
learning with very crude reinforcement
based supervision which is different
than either unsupervised corpus learning
or supervised learning in the sense of
computational linguistics where you're
fed sends parses of the sentences right
how kids learn is different than either
of those and I mean this really gets
into the AGI preschool idea that I had
proposed a long time ago I mean this
gets into the idea of no little kids are
a they're just observing a huge
multimodal world and an unstructured way
and B they're trying to achieve goals in
particular contexts for choosing actions
that achieve those goals and their
learning linguistic along with non
linguistic action and perception
patterns in the context of your
practical goal achievement in particular
context which is just different than
unsupervised grammar induction or
supervised grammar reduction or studying
caption images or whatever right so I I
tend to take a sort of heterogeneous and
opportunistic approach here and know
there's a lot to be learned from
unsupervised grammar induction we've
learned something from supervised
grammar induction too but I think we may
have learned what there is to be learned
from that there's a lot to be learned
from studying captioned images there's
something to be learned from robots even
as crude as they are now or game
characters and all the available
learning paradigms are a bit different
than what you know the human kids are
doing and we may need to do something
more like where the human baby is doing
or it may be that by piecing together
these different more computing friendly
learning paradigms we're gonna solve the
problem right I mean we don't know and
there's a lot of interesting experiments
to do I think for semantics in the end
you need to apply learning between
grammar and sentences that are parsed
using a grammar and a non linguistic
domain and you know that a non
linguistic domain could be logic
expressions gotten from somewhere like a
parallel corpus of English and large
bond which is a language speak about by
people with as syntax is directly
personal in the predicate logic
or it could come from correlation of
English census and images are gonna
captured image corpus or movies with
dialogue or closed captions associated
it could come from a robot that hears
stuff in the context of the environment
that's trying to act in but I mean
clearly although much semantics that we
humans use is very abstract like if
we're talking about quantum mechanics or
continental philosophy you know the
basis for the abstract semantics that we
learn is earlier stage smacks it comes
from correlating linguistic productions
with sensory non linguistic environments
so I think you know pattern mining
across linguistic productions and non
linguistic sensory environments or
situations this is how you have to get
to semantics and then of course
pragmatics is the same way but I mean
you're there you're correlating
linguistic productions with whole
episodes and then you're looking at
perception and goal based processing
across the episodes yeah Ben let me jump
off from that into something that just
come across my desk recently which was
paper by Jeff Klum he had three pillars
of how to go after artificial general
intelligence the first two I thought
were not that do but the third I thought
was quite interesting and perhaps
relevant to this language understanding
problem which is to develop technologies
for generating learning environments
could we for instance somehow miracle
occurs be able to develop language
learning environments that had embedded
within them pragmatics and semantics and
were supported by natural language
syntax and we're able to generate cases
for these language learning systems to
use to use multi-level learning the way
humans seem to as you point out either
classic unsupervised nor classic
computational linguistics provides that
multi-level problem solving framework
which is what we know that children do
does this seem to you a fruitful
approach
perhaps for language learning I mean
it's interesting I mean I think I would
say at a crude level we were generating
learning environments I don't know what
eight or seven or eight years ago and
I'm sure other people were well before
me right I mean because that anyone who
has tried to do AGI oriented or transfer
learning oriented learning in the video
game world usually they don't have a lot
of game world authors on their team so
they end up writing scripts to generate
stuff and then in the game world from
some probability distribution so I think
that that practice is not remotely new
but that paper that you're referencing
sort of highlighted it as a key portion
of an AGI approach with with greater
greater oomph and and rigor than had
been done before which is it's
potentially valuable I mean I think I'm
uh I don't think we yet have the models
that we would need we don't yet have the
discriminative models we would need to
generate an interesting enough diversity
of learning environments but it would be
certainly interesting to do I mean the
world that we live in you know that's a
weird and and diverse collection of
patterns in it that we're just not at
in-game world yeah I'd like to echo
tonight you know I baked cookies with my
wife from my 16 month old baby we make
one batch of peanut butter cookies and
one batch of cookies with some other
type of nut butter one of them was much
thicker than the other before we cooked
it and that result in the different
consistency after we cooked it right and
I mean the baby is learning from that
and there's endless things like that in
our everyday life like different kinds
of mud that you walked through the way
the beach near my house looked at high
versus low tide and how that affects the
behavior of the animals and plants there
you know each example like this seems
like a kind of irrelevant thing but the
point is we live in a
with an endless abundance of these weird
little distinctions which however are
carefully patterned on many different
levels right and we're just not getting
that in game worlds now these are
multi-sensory it'd be hard to get them
from videos unless you had a heck of a
lot of videos and many different scales
and space and time so I sort of I wonder
if the best attempts we had to do that
in a game world now would still be to
sort of rigid and limited in their
variety to drive the you know the
abundance of examples that humans have
in their minds from what should we draw
analogies to do our abductive inference
that drives our are transfer learning so
as as a concept it's great I'm not yet
convinced that we have the models needed
to generate diverse enough environments
to really do a GI now whether of course
generating game worlds with diverse
environments is cool for prototyping and
experimenting and that's been done by a
lot of people over over a long long
period of time but if we broaden the
idea a bit I mean I think the idea of
you're trying to use learning to learn
more training examples to train your AI
and then the smarter AI and then use
learning to learn more training examples
and create more training examples that's
interesting I mean I've been thinking
about that in a mathematical theorem
proving context where you know what
issue you have there is the number of
theorems that human mathematicians have
created in the history of math is not
that large when you compared to the
requirement of you know deep learning
algorithms and other machine learning
algorithm selling we don't have as many
theorems as we do sentences or images
right but yeah the complexity of
theorems is probably greater than that
of senses or images so on the other hand
just generating a bunch of random truth
theorems is not useful because they're
boring right so the idea there is if you
had a rule to identify
it's an interesting theorem then you can
generate trillions of interesting
theorems have your theorem prover try to
prove them it would fail a lot but maybe
you could prove billions of interesting
theorems then the proofs of those
billions of interesting theorems are
training data for a machine learning to
learn how to do proofs right so there's
a similarity there to the gameworld idea
right you're wanting to you know study
what you have to generate a new training
data use that new training data to train
a eyes which then gets smarter and you
can use to to generate even better
training data and lather rinse repeat so
I'm I think that idea can be interesting
in game worlds it could be interesting
and fair improving and in a lot of
places it's a question of whether you
have enough like requisite variety in
your available data to seed that initial
stage of automated environment
generation interesting all right the
next I think an area well worth people
studying up and passing includes paper
around trying to get people interested
in it sounds like you agree there's at
least some merit to it let's move on to
one another item closely related which
you know at some level dealing with
robotics is a pain in the ass right
stuff breaks you know that fall over
they have to deal with the holes of the
ground etc however when working with
robotics you get an amazingly detailed
simulation for free ie the universe
could you talk a little bit about the
intersection between AG AI and robotics
and what you think
robotics Springs or doesn't bring or the
mixed bag of things and brands I would
have to add that programming is also a
pain in the ass I mean we're just
choosing between pick your poison right
none of these things are not annoying
what
you really dig into the I mean writing a
simple Python script is one thing but
building OpenCog is not always that
simple or entertaining either there's a
lot of kinds of pain in the ass and it
is true the closer you get to the real
world
maybe that maybe the more painful things
become but I mean dealing with huge
image corpuses and video corpuses is
also highly there's a lot about her
there too right so anyone who's gonna
work on the AGI in any aspect it's gotta
have a very high pain tolerance
otherwise they'll do something that
gives more immediate gratification and
pays you more money quicker right but
robotics I mean the main issue isn't
that tapering the robots is a pain the
issue is that the current robots don't
so easily do what you want them to do
for AG I like what you want is a robot
that can move around in everyday human
worlds freely battery runs for at least
like a day on end before you have to
have to recharge it is gathering you
know multi-sensory input even if there's
glare or dim light or background noise
or something I mean basically that's
doing what a little kid does it rambles
around your house it looks and hears and
sees it grabs stuff and manipulates it
and picks it up and puts it down you may
not let them run up and down the stairs
you may not be able to pick up
everything as heavy as you can but he's
manipulating and perceiving and moving a
lot right and right now you don't quite
have that toddler robot yet you know if
you put all the pieces together but the
other Boston Dynamics movement with
Henson robotics
emotion expression and human perception
with the you know the arm I hand
coordination of I come and the fingertip
sensitivity of sin touch if you put
together all the robot bits and pieces
that exist now in various robotics
projects around the world you would have
that artificial toddler but no one seems
to be funded to do that so we have all
the pieces now but no one has put
together that toddler robot for AGI yet
and to do so would be expensive right
and to do it cheaply it's also probably
possible but it involves a lot of
engineering our
d which is gonna take years to do it
expensively easy and it cost you at
least hundreds of thousands of dollars
for the first toddler and so that's
that's what's really a pain is that
you're dealing with one or another robot
that's very limited in what it can do
either in you know manipulation or
mobility or perception or battery life
or something right and that's a bit
ironic because in theory the robot
should be much more flexible than AI in
a virtual world and practice given the
limitations of each robot if still
limited what you can do with each robot
but I think you know this is like years
not decades away from being resolves
it's mostly a matter of integrating
components that exist now and bring down
the costs through scaling up
manufacturing so that's I think you know
within three to eight years let's say
robots are gonna be a really useful tool
for AGI although they're that's only
very weakly true right now of course in
principle for AGI you don't need a robot
right I mean in principle you could get
a superhuman Superman living on the
internet there's a loads of sensors and
actuators attached there but everyone a
human-like mind for it to have roughly
human-like body it's gonna be pretty
valuable because so many aspects of the
human mind I mean they're attuned to
having a human-like body that's what we
are that that's simple things relatively
simple things like how we do I hand
coordination by combining movement and
perception and lower-level cognition but
also you know little things like the the
narrative self and the the quasi
illusion of free will and the relation
between self another like all these
things have to do with being agents
controlling a body that feels pain and
has an inside and an outside and so then
I mean you know when when you eat and
then you or you put something in
your mouth squish it and spit it out all
these things teach you something about
the relation in yourself and in the
world and persistence of objects and you
get all those
lessons in different way if you're
distributed supermind use mind and body
or the internet but how much you can
understand human values culture and
psychology that way I don't know right
so there's one question which is how
important is embodiment for getting a
really smart AGI the other question is
how important is embodiment for in the
AGI that understands what humans are and
empathizes with humans to a significant
extent that's interesting I had not
thought of that particular additional
benefit from doing the embodied
cognition even if it was wasn't
necessary to get the AGI it might make
an AGI that's much more relatable to us
and us to them let's move on to the next
subject I want to talk about which is
your singularity net project you know
this is really interesting you know the
idea of building a very broad network
that anybody can build AG AI components
on they can work with each other etc
want to give us a good detailed
description of singularity net and you
know what status is currently and what
you see going forward absolutely some
singularity net you know it manifests
some ideas I've had for a long time and
then I was prototyping in the web mind
project in the late nineties because web
mind was a you know a distributed
network of sort of autonomous agents
cooperating together to manifest some
emergent intelligence OpenCog to some of
those ideas and tried to make him sort
of more orderly and structured where you
have a very carefully chosen set of AI
algorithms acting in a common knowledge
store much more carefully designed to
configured to work closely entirely
together than anything in web mind was
singular net goes the other direction
it's like let's take these different AI
agents take a whole population of AI
agents each doing AI in their own way
and they don't necessarily need to know
how each other are working internally
they can interact via api's if they want
to share state they can do that too but
it's optional and then this society of
minds can have a payment system where
the AI is in that society page other
work or get paid by external agents for
work to the society minds is an economy
of mind and the economic aspect can be
used to do no assignment of credit and
assessment of value within the network
which is an important aspect of
cognition as well and then you know this
economy of minds is both it's another
approach to getting emergent AI where
you have a more loosely coupled network
of AI agents so you have an open cog but
which can still manifest some emergent
cognitive dynamics and it's collective
behaviors but then also you have
potentially a viable commercial
ecosystem wherein anyone can put an AI
agent into this network and the the you
know the AI agent give in charge
external software processes for services
and the eyes in the network can charge
each other for services and then you
know this becomes a marketplace and it's
however the infrastructure that we've
chosen to implement this was based on
you know the idea that this agent system
is a self-organizing system without the
central controller just as I mean the
brain doesn't have a central cell right
I mean the brain has some aspects that
are in more of a controlling role than
others but it's it's a massively
parallel system where each part of the
brain is you know getting energy on its
own and metabolizing and in some sense
guiding its own interactions so we use
blockchain as part of the plumbing for
the singular infrastructure to enable a
bunch of AI agents to interact in a way
that has no central controller but is
you know heterogeneous Li controlled and
the AI agents of the network sort of in
a participatory democratic issue a they
interact and then guide the interaction
the overall network and I think this is
it's both a good way to architect you
know a self-organizing agent system
moving from general intelligence toward
Adi and it's a very interesting way to
make a practical marketplace for a eyes
which know potentially can be more
heterogeneous in
kinds of applications it serves and then
who gets profit from that I that's done
then the current mainstream AI ecosystem
which is highly centered on a few large
corporations you have the visions
obviously just astounding and that two
fronts one this idea that anybody can
play pieces can be added that could be
explorations by a eyes to find out what
other pieces of AI might be synergistic
to their own capabilities the last point
you made that this is an ecosystem not
controlled by the big boys is something
I found very attractive when I first
learned about singularity that because
we are in a world where it seems that
deep progress in AI is being more and
more concentrated into fewer and fewer
hands and singularity net looks like one
of the relatively few counter trends to
that concentration could you talk a
little bit more about that and why you
think it might be important yeah I think
the importance of decentralized and open
approach to I is multifold right it's
important right now because it can
enable AI to do more good in the world
then this is gonna be possible with the
centralized hegemonic approach we've
seen the industry now it's also
important if you think that know the
current internet work of no ai's is
going to evolve into tomorrow's emergent
AGI because I mean if you look at what's
the current network of centralized AI is
doing I'd like to summarize it as
selling spying killing and gambling
right I mean it's advertising it's
making surveillance systems it's
controlling weapons systems and it's
doing finance financial prediction risk
management for large banks and so on so
I mean this you know felling spying
killing and gambling are part of the
human condition we're not gonna stamp
them out I don't know if we want to
stamp them out but I don't want them to
be as large a percent of the high
ecosystem as they are right now you'd
rather see more like educating
diseases doing science helping old
people creating art both because these
are cool things step around more on the
planet now and because if I know I eyes
are gonna turn into AG eyes I'd rather
have the AG eyes doing these
compassionate and aesthetically creative
things then you know serving the goals
of current corporations and large large
government so I think yeah there's a new
term importance and then there's a
little more speculative importance in
terms of the your potential of current
know I eyes in giving rise to tomorrow's
AG eyes and you know if you look at how
the current hegemonic situation has come
about that's not really because of bad
guys you know it's because of
self-organizing socio-economic dynamics
I mean that the Google founder is pretty
good people you know they're they're
trying to make money like all business
people are they're also genuinely trying
to build AI that will do good for the
world
but I mean the way they're doing it is
the way a public company has to do it as
they're trying to do good for the world
as a side effect of generating
shareholder value and the way they're
generating shareholder value is kind of
the way they have to do it they're
taking whatever works and they're just
doubling down on it I mean they're
trying a lot of side projects to but in
the end ads are what's making the money
I mean it's their fiduciary duty to be
using the best AI for that as much as
makes sense and if you look in China
I mean Xi Jinping is doing some things
that don't agree with on the other hand
you know Chinese government has lift
lifted way more people out of poverty
over the last thirty years than every
other part of the world combined and I
think you know Chinese government is
genuinely trying to advance the total
utility of the Chinese population and
they see that AI is very helpful for
this and you know they think building a
surveillance state is in the interest of
the you know the utilitarian
good of the Chinese population we're not
looking at psychopaths who are trying to
develop AI
to build the Terminator or something
we're looking at people developing AI in
the interest of generally beneficial
minded goals but there's these network
effects involved and that's both good
and bad right I mean the network effects
allow a smart AI to accumulate more and
more resources that can partly go to a
building smarter and smarter AI but the
network effects often mean that whoever
you know succeeds first with neuro a
eyes in particular tasks that lends
himself to rapid deployment of neuro AI
for useful ends whoever succeeds first
you can you accumulate the hell of a lot
of money I love data to train the a eyes
a lot of processing power to feed the
eyes and there's a powerful network
effect there and this is what Google has
been benefiting from I mean the Chinese
government is benefiting from this
Facebook use Microsoft is IBM for
example isn't so much because they've
been deploying AI in markets in ways
that don't lead to these tremendous
network effects and that's cause them to
fall behind in spite of having a lot of
smart AI people and some AI technologies
are very good at certain things I mean
one of the cool things with singularity
net is intrinsically at least the logic
of singularity Nets economic model has a
lot of network effects to it it's a
double-sided platform like uber Airbnb
or you know Amazon's neural net model
marketplace it's a double-sided platform
in the sense that one side is the supply
of AI that developers for open-ended
network the other side is the demand
which is product developers who want to
use the eyes of the network to fuel
their products and it at end users right
and so that's something that can be very
powerful if you can get off the ground
so if you get enough demand you can get
more supply and the supply you can get
more
does she have this going enough they can
take off really really fast so there's
the possibility to use the same network
effect trick that Google Facebook you
know and then Tencent Baidu Holly Baba
and so on have used to get this
decentralized network of I eyes off the
ground and you know it doesn't have to
displace totally the big tech companies
to have a huge impact we can look at
Linux as an example I mean Linux didn't
obsolete Apple and Microsoft they're
still making money you know trillion
dollar companies but on the other hand
Linux it's a number one mobile operating
system its dominant in the server market
it's big in the open-source ethos behind
it has been huge has been used available
for the developing world for the maker
and robotics community right so
similarly if we can get a decentralized
a ID network to have a major role in the
way that AI is utilized in the world I
mean then that's gonna be tremendous
even if it doesn't obsolete the hegemony
growing that network with the
double-sided network effect is certainly
a practical challenge right and that's
what we're working on with a singularity
that platform now one thing I'd like to
pick up on the singularity that model
you described how you have a potential
network effect around a two-sided market
those are indeed very very powerful
business models you know much of my
business career was actually around
trying to build two-sided markets and
sometimes we were successful sometimes
we weren't usually it meant
investing in building one side of the
market first could you talk a little bit
about your go-to-market strategy for
singularity net and how you expect to
achieve a critical mass somewhere to get
the two-sided market start the cycle
there's a couple of different strategies
we're applying here but I would say if
it's one side in the market first we're
essentially focusing on building the
and cited the market first and then
training the supply internally initially
because we have a bunch of AI developers
on the singularity net foundation team
or a larger the people I work with on
previous projects and so we're able to
build some AI ourselves to put in in the
network and then where we are doing AI
developer workshops and we're putting
some requests for AI on the platform and
and say people with tokens to put new AI
into the network so we're not totally
neglecting the supply side but the
demand side is getting more of a big
push in a couple forums so one of those
forms is we're spinning off a for-profit
company called singularity studio which
is a whole separate enterprise aimed at
building commercial products into the
enterprise on top of of the singularity
net platform and initially we're
building a product suite aimed at
FinTech in the finance industry so say
you'll have a risk management product
which then you know it would be
subscribed to by a large financial firm
to solve a problem and say hedging or a
credit risk assessment or something but
then on the back end that product is
getting its AI by making calls into the
singularity net platform so if this
business succeeds in creating and
selling you know successful products
initially to financial services and
after that other vertical markets
Internet of Things health tech and so on
then you know each product that sold the
licensing fees for each year a fraction
that will be converted from fiat into a
GI token and used to drive the Adi token
based market in singularity net so
that's one thing the singularity studio
which we're currently pulling together
and we have some enterprise customers
already for that I mean a couple that
are publicly announced but there's
bunch more big ones that we're working
with they're going to be announced in
the next few months we've also launched
accelerator called singularity net X lab
where we're recruiting projects from the
community that will build software
products aimed at certain niches again
using AI in the singularity net and this
again is focused on the demand for the
network side because they're building
products on top of singular net but they
also help with supply cuz in most cases
they I that we put in there is being
augmented by AI that that this team puts
in there also and then the projects in
the X lab incubator so that they're
being you know we can give them some
tokens help them get AI services on the
network and we can help them with
publicity using our PR engine and help
them with with AI expertise where we can
so these are both efforts kind of brute
force the demand side we're also talking
to some investors scaling up this
accelerator slash incubator effort where
we'd be able to put some more money into
seeding projects leveraging the platform
using some investment money raised
specifically for that purpose so I think
if if we get the singularity studio
building enterprise products and getting
some large enterprises using through
these products a singularity net and
then we get some smaller entrepreneurial
products from the X lab accelerator then
you know we're getting some serious
utilization of the token and if through
these efforts we get serious utilization
of the ATI token and the AG ITER
committed ecosystem you know all of a
sudden we have a utility talking with
actual utility which is almost unheard
of in the blockchain space right and
this this is gonna attract a lot more
attention in the blockchain community
and hopefully in the AI community and I
think this will then incent more people
to put their AI into the platform we'll
get some usage from the developer
workshops we're doing but in the end I
mean having demand for the platform was
sort of it will give some extra appeal
to developers because then it's not only
but they're putting
ái out there in a really cool yo
decentralized democratically governed
platform there's an actual you know
market of customers who will pay them to
use their AI which is certainly the
financial incentive only won't be enough
for quite a while to it's a really huge
market but a a decent financial
incentives that's meaningful
combined with the cool value and the
political appeal of what we're doing I
think we'll be able to seduce the supply
side a lot well this is a truly
visionary project which you know could
change the world
there's a lot of will it works will you
reach a critical mass that's the token
aspect getting away or does it add value
all unknown but it's certainly a very
interesting experiment worth trying
let's move on to an another topic which
is thinking about AI and AGI in the
context of complex self-organizing
systems emergence chaos strange
attractors I know those are things
you've thought a lot about and I thought
least a little about so take it away Ben
yeah I think my focus on complex
nonlinear dynamics and emergence is
something that sets my line of thinking
apart from the mainstream of the AI
world now like I remember when Jeff
Hopkins book on intelligence came out
you know 15 years ago or something seems
like forever but I mean that that book
laid out the vision of no AI in terms of
hierarchical neural nets combining
probabilistic reasoning with
backpropagation I mean it was different
than the deep neural Nets that are most
successful now but conceptually it was
along very very similar lines and when I
reviewed that book I what I said is well
this is interesting it's part of the
story but he's leaving out two key
things he's leaving out evolutionary
learning which we know is there in the
brain in the sensory tlemen snarled
Darwinism modeling the brain is
developing system and he's leaving out
no none
vyx and emergence and strange attractors
which you know are key and how the brain
synchronizes and coordinates all its
parts like these hierarchical networks
doing learning and probabilistic pattern
recognition are there but they're only
part of the story if you don't have
evolution and although poesis like self
reconstruction and self construction
based on linear dynamical attractors
then you're really missing out a lot so
in the early 90s when I was first
thinking about how the mind works I
wrote a book called the evolving mind
where I argued there are sort of two key
forces underlying intelligence systems I
mean in philosophy terms that come down
to being and becoming so we're back to
Hegel right but in dynamics terms you
can think of them as evolution and other
places other voices being a term
introduced by Maturana and Varela
meaning like self creation self building
which is is one particular kind of
complex non-linear dynamics that you've
seen in biology where a system is
involved with rebuilding and
reconstructing itself I knew all the
time and you know evolution creates the
new from the old and other places keeps
you know an organism a system intact in
a changing and mutating environment and
no nonlinear dynamics are key to both of
these you could also think of this as
evolution and ecology which are
hand-in-hand in natural systems and even
in the body where you have Eagleman
neural Darwinism explaining brain data
because evolution and you know gern is
clonal selection theory explaining the
immune system as an evolving system
along with you know the cell assembly
theory which had came up with to explain
part of the have the brain works I mean
that's basically an ecological theory
and it's self-assembly is sort of
autocratic system that keeps
constructing and rebuilding itself in
the immune system the network theory of
Jonah is the the autocratic ecological
aspect so I mean you if you
leave out ecology slash other places in
evolution and you have only hierarchical
pattern recognition you're leaving out a
whole lot of what makes the even mind
interesting like creativity is evolution
and you know the self and the will and
all these and you know the conscious
focus of attention which is binding
together different parts of the mind
into a perceived impractical unity this
is all about strange attractors emerging
in the brain building you know
autopoietic systems of activity pattern
so you're leaving out all this like you
do in modern deep learning systems well
you're leaving out a of a lot about
what makes the human minds interesting
granted that you're also capturing some
some interesting parts and not much
study your thought is going into these
aspects in the mind right now and this
is partly because of the business models
of the large companies and governments
are driving AI development because you
know creativity and ecological self
reconstruction design that directly tied
to easily measurable metrics that you
can use to drive supervisor
reinforcement learning so for a company
that's driven by their KPIs and whatnot
that company is naturally driven toward
AI algorithms that are focused on
maximizing some simply formulated reward
function that's a little harder if
you're talking about evolution to create
new things or an ecological system whose
goal is to maintain and grow itself the
money on money returned monster yeah
yeah yeah exactly so it ties into like
the Neo Darwinist you have evolution its
nature tooth and claw thinks nature make
sure red in tooth and claw I mean this
this view of evolution takes evolution
is about you know maximizing some
simplicity defined Fitness function when
you look at evolution and ecology tied
together in more of a nonlinear
dynamical view
you're getting beyond the simplicity
defined Fitness function and it's a
little more fuzzy to grapple with this
goes back to you know something I
observed a long time ago I pushed
forward the idea of AGI but actually
it's a bad term from a fundamental
philosophical you like no one knows what
intelligence means humans aren't really
all that general I don't know what
artificial is really because it's all
part of nature so I don't like the
unofficial the general or the
intelligence really what I'm after is
self-organizing complex adaptive
dynamical systems I mean that's that's
just more of a mouthful and it's kind of
fuzzier to grapple with and
conceptualize this ties in with what my
friend Weaver David Weinberg called
open-ended intelligence in his PhD
thesis of that title from the global
green Institute in Brussels I mean
fundamentally if an AGI emerges like out
of the Internet of the conglomeration of
a bunch of a GI system narrow AI systems
this may be an open-ended intelligence
which stretches our notion of what
intelligence is but is an incredibly
complex self-organizing adaptive system
which in many ways has more generality
than humans do but isn't even about
maximizing reward functions in any
simplistic way although you may be you
can model some aspects of what it does
like locally in terms of certain reward
functions if that's a very interesting
question on what is what is that thing
is it a mind it may not be conscious in
the sense we we think of ourselves as
being conscious but it may have some
attributes that are in some way
analogous to consciousness or in partly
a larger space of efficacy in the world
which aren't necessarily congruent with
consciousness but nonetheless give it
the ability to respond to feedback and
find its way in the world if you take a
view like Chalmers takes in his
philosophy of consciousness what he says
is every
thing in the universe has some spark of
proto consciousness I guess he he calls
it proto consciousness to try to make it
more palatable to people with different
perspectives on consciousness if
everything in the universe has some
spark of proto consciousness in some
form then you would view like a human
like your mammal like consciousness and
something that emerges from these sparks
of proto consciousness you know when
they're associated with a certain type
of information processing system like a
system that achieves goals in the
context of controlling some localized
embodied organism right so if you look
at it in that way the smarts of proto
consciousness you know involved in a
global distributed complex
self-organizing dynamical system across
the internet which doesn't have a
central controller even as much as are
like hypothalamus or basal ganglia are
our central controller in some broader
sense maybe there is a variety of
consciousness associated with it like
there's some complex self-organizing
pattern of proto conscious sparks there
but it may not have the unity that
characterizes human-like consciousness
and so what in a way like this unity if
our consciousness is there because our
body is a unified system that has to
control itself without dying right and
so that gives us some unified goals of
like food sex and survival if you have a
different kind of complex
self-organizing mindish system which can
replace its parts that will and with the
different parts are pursuing various
overlapping goals in a very dynamic way
I mean whatever self-organizing
conglomeration of proto conscious sparks
exists there may be much less unified
that what's associated with the human
mind brain and then is that better is
that worse I mean that comes out to your
value system and yeah the fact that our
value system values this unified variety
of consciousness ish stuff more than
this
more diffuse but perhaps more complex
variety of consciousness ish being like
is there any more profound than saying
like we think human women look more
beautiful than gorillas right like we
like what we have exactly I will say I'm
finding it useful to not co-mingle the
concept of intelligence so strongly into
this broader picture of mind you know
the more I dig into consciousness the
more I appreciate John Searle you know I
used to say sir all of his damn Chinese
room.what misleading stuff but you know
more I thought about the more appreciate
it
Cyril argues in our consciousness is our
consciousness human consciousness is
very specific so the way we are
organized in terms of our memories that
have a couple on various time frames we
have perhaps something like Bernard bars
global workspace and how all those
things work produce something called
consciousness and Cyril likes to say
consciousness is a lot like digestion
you can't point to some part of the body
and say that's the digestion digestion
is a process that includes our teeth our
thread our stomach our colon our liver
etc and consciousness could be thought
of the same way and so you know Cyril
had been laughed at by some AI
researchers when they interpret him is
saying that you know machine
consciousness is not possible but as
I've gotten to understand Searles
argument better I think his argument is
that something that it's analogous to
human consciousness in a machine can't
be the same because it's details of its
design won't be the same in the same way
in the food industry in the
pharmaceutical industry we have
digesters which are analogous to what
our digestive system does but don't do
it the same way and are very very
different with respect to the details so
I'm starting to use consciousness in a
narrower frame as something that is more
like what humans are and so I'm willing
to buy the will
some point had things that are sort of
like our consciousnesses in a machine
but that's only a small part of the much
bigger mind space and the things that
you were talking about you know what is
the what is it like to be a loosely
coupled set of intelligences running
across the internet solving many
problems both in serial and in parallel
might be nothing at all like
intelligence we have a tendency to
anthropomorphize from our consciousness
to what these larger brain mind as I use
the word mind types might be
increasingly finding that attempt to
expand the concept of consciousness
unhelpful actually yeah I guess you know
Weaver's concept of open-ended
intelligence was created to you know
deal with intelligence and these broader
types of dynamical systems beyond
anything human like or mammal like
whether you want to extend the word
intelligence to deal with these
different types of dynamical systems or
have a different word for it is that
yeah that's the kind of issue that I
never worried about much sort of it as a
mathematician originally my attitude is
like you can define your word to mean
whatever you want and then use it that
way so I mean whether that really is
intelligence or not or is some other
broader thing terminology choice
regarding consciousness I think you and
I don't entirely see it the same way but
vaguely close I mean when I wrote a
paper on consciousness basically I
called it characterizing human-like
consciousness I think because I
considered that a sort of separate
problem I mean one one type of problem
is understanding nature of consciousness
in general which is interesting but
another type of problem is you know the
consciousness of human-like systems
where then you have to define what you
mean by a human-like system but I was
thinking of you know if you have a
system whose goal is to control your
mobile
body in a much larger and more complex
environment and then you know the the
goals involve orchestrating actions over
various time scales I think yeah these
requirements sort of Drive you to a
narrow subset of the scope of possible
cognitive architectures and you could
say then they lead you to some of the
aspects of human-like consciousness I
think where we might differ is I mean I
think Thoreau was arguing something
stronger than what you're saying and I
think Searle was arguing in essence that
the qualia are there in the human being
and the crowley wouldn't be there in the
digital computer and maybe since you
don't take crowley seriously maybe
you're ignoring the aspect of Searles
argument whereas i I do take qualia
seriously but I think that Craig are
universal I'm a Penn psychist so then
the way I look at it is you know the
elementary qualia associated with every
percept concept entity Whitehead II in
process whatever you know these organize
themselves into collective system level
qualia differently depending on the kind
of system so that human-like species or
variety of consciousness that variety of
experience is associated with systems
that are organized like a human and it's
not clear that at the level of
description Searle was using of like
what words come in and out of the of the
box of the guy in the Chinese room it's
not clear you could distinguish what is
the state of consciousness of the guy
inside the room so I mean his point
there was sort of if if you have some
giant lookup table or deep neural net or
whatever inside a box that's acting like
a human it doesn't have to have the same
conscious state as iam and then I think
that's that seems true to me but that
just means that that level of
observation the external day that
doesn't let you reverse-engineer the
internal state right I mean it's amusing
that quantum mechanics would like if you
if you
all the vibrations of the elementary
particles in the universe you can induce
the State of Mind of the guy inside the
box right but from from the verbal
productions I guess you you couldn't but
I mean I don't know if that proves what
Sura wanted it to prove really it just
proves that the functional description
at the crude level doesn't imply the
internal state but if the state of
consciousness if the qualia are
associated with the internal state and
dynamics and not just the crude
functional description then so what I'm
not sure I think I think as you know we
do disagree about this a little bit and
at some degree I do expect that when we
fully understand consciousness we're
gonna say so what it's not it's it's
less amazing than we thought however I
do believe it it's cerillion in the
sense that one would not expect
consciousness from the Chinese room
because consciousness is the experience
of processing information in a specific
architecture and I strongly suspect that
has to do with the couplings of our
memories on various time frames
yeah human-like consciousness is that
but then I mean you're you're bypassing
the question of whether a tree or rock
or the Internet has some form of qualia
some form of awareness or experience
yeah those like a tree maybe I don't
know about rock but a tree could have
information flows with storage and sense
of continuity perhaps you can't
distinguish physics from information
every physical system can be
equivalently viewed as doing information
processing so I mean that distinction
sort of isn't there
the math level yeah though it's a much
simpler kind of information processing
one could argue well anyway this has
been a truly interesting conversation so
thank you very much for a very
interesting conversation Ben and you
know I look forward to seeing the work
you do going forward production services
and audio editing by Stanton media lab
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music com