the amazing wisdom in this room hearing
kind of your conversations your stories
your journeys seeing the rapid prototype
of Tom earlier the experience he brought
the expertise that you've you know had
it your lives is really magical and we
just wanted to present that and it's
it's a pretty special thing so yes we
also wanted to recognize the introverts
in the room for introverts experience
like I've been kind of sometimes be a
nightmare
I know even for someone like myself I
obviously am a very positive happy
person but sometimes being in large cogs
like this actually make me go crazy and
need to retreat to that kind of space of
Solace to create and to get centered so
just some extra love in the room for
those of you who when you have five
people five
[Applause]
so I want to welcome us back from lunch
with a quick meditation so join me and
just relaxing your body and sitting
however is comfortable for you and
closing your eyes and take a deep breath
in and let it go
take another deep breath in
and let it go
took another deep breath and hold this
one at the top and then let it go with
the side one more of those deep breath
in hold it at the top and let it go with
an even louder say ha
I think what to do one more of those
sounds like you guys liked it take one
more deep breath in hold it and let it
go ha yeah
hey wiggle your toes a little bit and
remember back to last night in your
small groups and sharing your crucible
moments think back to the moment in your
life when you knew through your lens
make an impact on this planet and you
felt called or inspired or angered by
something much larger than yourself
and how that moment isn't some way
propelled you to be here at Hyde this
weekend
bring to mind some topic our issue it
really matters to you something that you
feel compelled to contribute to in your
lifetime
and imagine it's fifty years in the
future but something around that topic
it's very different in a positive way
and your wildest dreams what might be
true how might it look different might
humanity look different the planet
looked different fifty years from now
what does it look like feel like taste
like I'm smell like
take another deep breath in
let it go
when you're ready go ahead and open your
eyes so we've got three absolutely
extraordinary panelists here today to
talk about the future of humanity and
systems thinking and one of the things
that many participants say coming out of
hive this is my ninth hive now is that
they leave with more clarity on the work
that they want to do and a reframe on
their vision for the future of humanity
and the world can look like and their
work could look like and it hi here were
always prototyping and a couple months
ago we came up with this idea to try a
panel on the afternoon of today around
the world in the future of the world we
were brainstorming for it it came with a
few dream speakers and these dream
speakers are all on stage with us here
today
and these speakers are not only some of
the most brilliant thinkers I've ever
met who have visions for the future of
the world but they're also some of the
most humble and heartfelt leaders that
I've ever met as well and a really
thoughtful in the way in which they do
their work and leave their lives so I'm
really excited and honored to have them
here today and I'll start by introducing
them and then the last questions for a
while and then at the end you guys will
have a chance to ask questions as well
so I'll start by introducing Tom and
Tom's already been introduced this
morning so you know that he's worked at
Google X and Yahoo in factory accents
now working on put a tech thinking and
Tom also his written children's books as
a comic strip author as a very talented
musician Jennifer here has been an
executive of biotech companies and
environmental companies and helped bring
more than 40 technologies into market
she's a coach a visionary and she and
her partner Brian who's in the audience
run a project together called evolving
love which is all about changing the
future of partnership a romantic
partnership and she's also really
involved with community and community
living here in the Bay Area and Beyond
and runs a camp at Burning Man called
mystic project the pleasure of camping
with this year and it was amazing I see
quite a few mystics in the room here and
yeah yeah and Daniel is the co-founder
of or the founder I should say of
emergence project which is a think-tank
thinking about what the future of
civilization could look like thinking
about infrastructure people's worldviews
basically everything and how they all
interrelate it was also the co-founder
of neuro hacker which is thinking about
the future of human physiology and
brains and how to enhance our cognitive
function and the way that we really can
act as people and so with that I want to
start by asking each of you to share an
abbreviated version of some of your
crucible moments and some of the key
decision points in your life when you
knew when you felt called or compelled
to make a difference kind of what has
led you to what you're working on now
now
whistles ago Daniel will start thank you
Jennifer was the co-founder of emergence
project with me we got to work very
deeply on really honored to be here with
all these people
crucible moments I first just really
loved that I've started with crucible
moments last night because having
everyone start with vulnerability and
then vulnerability connected to their
purpose it's just such a neat way of
doing it and I'm happy they were
starting that way so for me it was a
series of things where my own events
that caused suffering and exposure to
other suffering in the world sensitize
me to kind of the magnitude and the
extent and nature of suffering and then
that kind of forced how do we solve
distance so I was fortunate to be
homeschooled growing up so I got to be
exposed to kind of unusual things early
on because of that so these I'll share a
particular small set of crucible moments
that first one I was maybe eight or nine
years old saw a slaughter truck a
factory farm cattle slaughter truck and
looking in I saw cows in a in the
condition that I had never seen animals
in and it was like really
existentially devastating for me because
it was so unbelievably protest which led
me to then go to a factory farm and just
dive down the rabbit hole of what was
happening and I grew up like so many
people as someone who loved animals but
also just didn't connect to what our
relationship to animals is at scale and
that got me into activism and which
started in animal rights and then
environmental work and then social
justice work it ended up turning out for
me that
the suffering of any sentient thing
didn't bother me more or less than the
other thing so whether we were talking
about factory farms or species
extinction or whaling or extreme poverty
or they were just so completely
unacceptable that it's just like there
was no way through for me in life it
wasn't a way through for all of them and
so this was the beginning of existential
devastation that led to of course
purpose as it often does for people
where the thing that happened for me was
like is there a model of success for my
life that isn't success for all of them
that's okay with me and the answer is of
course no right because if I'm gonna be
excited about my own success with with
that degree of intensity of suffering
through so much of the world I have to
be at least partially psychopathic I
have to be able to disconnect from the
experience of other sentient things so
much and any success moment that was
based on psychopathy wasn't compelling
for me and so then that found my own
life path and success definition
with success for everybody right
then as I got deeply into activism I got
to see how profoundly interconnected the
different areas of problems in the world
work one of the early experiences was
working on a elephant poaching project
and this solution was getting bigger
fences around the preserves and harsher
sentencing for poachers but after a
tremendous amount of work and that
succeeded in those elephants were being
poached the underlying poverty of the
poachers wasn't addressed the mindset of
people towards animals the underlying
macroeconomic system that created
poverty the macroeconomic system by
which the animals were worth something
dead and they weren't worth anything
alive on anyone's balance sheet led the
same groups of people to start hunting
the white rhino in the mountain gorillas
and I saw that we just moved problems
and that got me into systems analysis
and doing deep systems analysis on how
all the various issues were connected
and it was that she became clear that
the deepest biggest existential issues
were so profoundly interconnected they
weren't solvable in isolation and then
not only were they not when were they
interconnected but that's a lot of the
same underlying structural drivers and
so the kind of the process crucible
moment for me was wow there's profound
there's profound enough suffering that
just because we put it somewhere else
and don't look at it like this it's not
a page just continue to not look at it
and I got to look at it enough that I
could never stop thinking about it
and then and so we need to address a lot
of things and with solutions that are
fundamentally different in approach than
almost anything currently happening and
so that really directed a life course
for me of saying
what are the deepest underlying causes
of why all these things are happening
what would it take to shift those causes
and what is a blueprint or a set of
criteria for blueprints for a future of
civilization that obsoletes the
foundational causes of unnecessary human
induced suffering in Canada at scale so
it's awesome because my like completely
depressed suicidal existential angst
growing up with nightmares ended up
leading of course to my recognition that
that was that that was a tiny degree of
suffering chimera what so many Wren and
how do we solve that so that's an oyster
thank you yeah I'd love to share I I had
a really beautiful group where we got to
share some of these moments and this
amazing gent coming by is just filling
our ears so just excuse the noise yes my
crucible moment you know I had an
experience that we all have growing up
which is that we learn from a very young
developmental age that when we do
something when we try to manipulate
reality it responds and when you have
that experience you can begin to
understand that you are the architect of
your universe and a favorite spiritual
teacher said to me one day that I just
loved which is that you are the universe
that you formerly thought you were
inside of this thing that you thought
was just affecting you you are actually
actively participating and creating it
and so at a very precocious age maybe
many of you can relate I decided I'm
going to leave the world better than I
found it and I started saying
when I was a really young little girl
way younger men could have actually
taken any action but it drove me into
environmental science and I kept that
passion if I want to leave the world
better than I sounded like how many of
you kind of feel that in your bones
right yeah
and so fast-forward I met the man of my
dreams I met Bryon Franklin who's in
this audience my husband my partner in
crime my partner in life and in love and
I have been a voracious taking in like I
was just voraciously taking in spiritual
teachings and ideas from the greatest
thinkers of our time the greatest
spiritual teachers of our time and
seeking knowledge and on a very very
faithful day we went to this breakfast
and it was one of our first dates and he
looks me in the eye right through man he
says Jennifer you've been a seeker your
whole life
and what I see in you is a woman that
can become a deliverer and in that
moment this man looking me in the eye
believing in me to be one of those
speakers teachers that I had been
idolizing my whole life just seeking I
realized that what was next for me was
to stand up and be a deliverer not just
a seeker and what occurred for me in
that moment with this beautiful and this
was what the most enlightened man I've
ever met in my life
looking me in the eye and telling me
this was that like so many of us I was
in my white ivory tower waiting for
someone else right thinking that I could
eventually derive my strength if I read
another book or went to another teacher
or sought another course and realized
that the strength and courage that I
needed to derive would not occur until
my feet touch the ground which meant
that I needed to actually begin to
deliver some of this work in the world
and for me his belief in me his love of
me his championship of me was a crucible
moment and I began to teach and lead
with him from that day forward in fact
he came to me one day after nine months
of resistance going no no no no this is
your job I this is not my job I'm a
scientist I don't belong in front of
stages doing this who's gonna listen to
me right apparently and he looks me in
the eye and with not a shred of
shrinking back he says Jennifer I refuse
to stand up here one more day and do one
more course with you in the back of the
room will
handing out handouts because every word
coming from my mouth is sourced from us
and from you I am shutting down the
company and I will not teach anymore
without you here because your voice is
needed so it wasn't just I believe in
you to become this I refuse to go
another day without you doing this and
that putting it on the line changed me
forever and I am so grateful to this man
and to the power of love in our lives to
do that for us alright that's pretty
intense
my things just like maybe a little more
greedy and practical like that was
amazing I'm like a normal person
so like okay immigrant parents came to
the u.s. basically couldn't read or
write any language as illiterate seven
so I only thought pictures and numbers
which is not really a problem because
there's still a lot of thinking you can
do but kind of a problem because you
can't make any friends which is fine
that's fine
spends a bunch of time instead like
trying to understand the universe so
like I was very excited about life as a
kid like being in nature and studying
the Stars and got pretty far all those
things and just like loved a lot about
life then around like age 11 or 12 I
started to like recognize what the world
was actually like so I grew up a lot in
the 80s so there's like this thing
called mutually assured destruction
where we had this thing where it's like
our policy to like not get killed is
we'll kill all of them too
that was like the official policy of
both the USSR and the USA around the use
of nuclear weapons
it's like don't worry we'll kill all of
them if they try to kill us
don't worry that's that's actually our
strategy that's like what is this what
adults do this is crazy
and then like not that long afterwards
there's this thing called the Savings
and Loan scandal and like it was a major
economic collapse not that different
than 2008 in retrospect we do this all
the time but at the time I was like how
crazy is this because like a little
number change somewhere and there's
literally a person jumping off of a
50-story building because it's over for
them because a number changed and I was
like we made this world we made a world
where a number changes on a spreadsheet
and you jump out of a building
we made a world where our strategy to go
deal with peace is that we can bomb
every single
your cities three times over that's like
what we created and and this like I was
realizing this around age 11 or 12 and I
didn't have that feeling like oh my gosh
like I'll just make this all better my
my hope was like let me just get this
through this thing without making the
world any worse because this is crazy
 up I don't even want to be near
this stuff the actual action I took was
like at age 15 I started a punk rock
band it was just like let's tear it all
down let's tear it all down and I was in
like this very like angst all
existential it's all up let me
just try to get through it mode for
quite a little while actually
and it wasn't until I was maybe like 18
or so that I heard this phrase and I
can't find the source I've tried look
for it since I don't know maybe just
like I made it up for myself but I feel
like somebody told me this but the
phrase was a a cynic is just a
frustrated idealist and I was like
initially I was like whatever that's a
weird thing to think and then like you
know it's one of those things that stuck
with me and that as I kept coming back
to I was like maybe well maybe that's
what it is
like I'm so skinned cynical about the
world because I'm actually a frustrated
idealist like maybe there is ideals that
I have maybe there is something that
matters beyond just getting through this
without making it any worse and you know
that started like a very long journey
that's not all these different parts of
it and none of it involves like all this
amazing stuff that you guys did that's
crazy well but it's just running very
quickly through it so that was all
happening I started to try to do some
stuff but I sucked at it basically and
then when I was 20
almost died so that was the whole thing
but maybe we'll skip it I don't know
it's kind of interesting I almost died
basically what happened was I was like I
was like so good at like doing stuff in
the existing system so like once I
actually put my mind to it and I stopped
being a cynic I could actually get a lot
of stuff done so it's getting a lot of
stuff done but so good at getting stuff
done and I and my overall strategy for
dealing with stress was like I will
internalize it and just work harder like
my immigrant parents basically taught me
just work harder and I would and not
only would I do do that for myself which
worked fine as a strategy as I like got
a team and became an executive and had
more and more people reporting to me I
absorb all of their stress too because I
was like I don't want you to stress let
me take that on I don't want you to
stress let me take that and I would just
work that much harder that much harder
that much harder at some point before
age 30 almost did not make aged 30 I had
internalized so much of that stress that
basically my GI system stopped
functioning just burst open and I lost
40% of my blood in 30 minutes and that's
the thing that can happen and in the
emergency room they gave me four
simultaneous blood transfusions because
it turns out that when you're losing
blood that fast they can't just give you
one
you'll still die they need to give you
four at once otherwise you will die so
they gave me four at once and it the
bleeding didn't stop quite yet so that
gave me another 4:1 simultaneously again
after that and a couple more after that
but eventually it stabilized and I did
not die nice job and I woke up the next
morning so I woke up the next morning
with two important realizations one of
them was that human body is mostly
liquid and that liquid is mostly blood
basically all my blood got replaced so
I'm mostly somebody else today
and then like you know you know and the
other realization was that I was only
alive because of the generosity of like
eight or more other people that I'm
never gonna meet and it's just like you
sit back and you like recognize you know
there's a sense like okay so here's the
thing
why people love Mike Rinna yeah take on
more stress do it you can do it if you
push harder work harder absolutely and
I'm not saying that hard work is not a
big deal it's not important do it but
what I was also living at the age of 29
was the belief that I would somehow need
to shoulder all myself
and she like literally wake up in the
blood and the body of eight other people
have recognized how connected and
supported I was by every other human
being on earth then I was like no this
is not me this is everybody but yeah I'm
gonna work hard my
working hard because all of you are in
me and I am in all of you like let's do
this and when I got back to doing my
work because I was an up-and-coming
executive it changed everything about
how I led and it took like years and
years for it to actually fully propagate
and do all the experiments and like find
a spot where I'm like this is how I want
leadership to feel and but like
eventually got there with all of that
and I don't know there's more crucible
moments but whatever like that's
probably enough
[Applause]
and that leads nicely into something
that Jennifer I know you're really
passionate about which is the
interconnectedness between all of us and
I'd love to hear more about the work
that you do with Brian and with couples
to think about the future of love in the
future of partnership and now that
bleeds into your work with communities
like Kent mystic at Burning Man and
teens and leadership and kind of the
future of communities in general so you
can speak of it and of an individual
connection level and then what you see
as the future of partnership and
community and what your vision is for
that it's a big question um so I was
really struck inspired really by a
community that lives in Tamara and
hearing this phrase really really like
it was a hot tub rich felling me in this
moment which is that we cannot live in a
world without war until we heal the war
between the sexes so if we take that on
for a moment where we take the realm of
love which we think of as the personal
the individual like how do I get more
love in my life and sex and affection
and safety all of those are very
important things but if we realize that
love is also political right at a larger
scale because what happens is if we live
in a world where we are at war with
ourselves which is the majority of us we
are divided the masculine and feminine
in us with its different poles its
different desires its different value
sets are at war inside of us we live in
a holographic universe it's my belief we
mirror it we holographic a tree
represent that systemically so then I am
at war inside myself then I'm at war
with my partner and I'm creating
conflict and then and then I recreate
those kind of warring systems in my
economic policies and then I
create that in my political systems and
then there at war and then I recreate
that in my culture because it's all
connected I mean we're going to talk a
lot and we're already talking about
systems understanding of this reality
and so when I started to go into like
what can I do
what's the trim tab to use like a buck
Mr Fuller term term and a trim tab is
kind of like a fancy way of saying like
what is the the the leverage point that
if you push in a small with a small
amount of effort here it yields an
enormous result on the other side when I
when I dived into that question because
I did want to leave the world better
than I found it damn it right I wanted
to do that as that precocious child was
living into this dream and I realized
that one of the things that all of us in
this room can do you know you all have
your in unique ways that you're going to
give your gifts to the world to really
shape it into the future but there's one
thing we can all do which is heal the
war inside ourselves right which is
evolve the way that we love right and
when we do that it's my belief like how
does that relate to the future it's my
belief that all of our bad
decision-making is sourced from fear and
when we're driven by separation and
division and war and conflict inside
ourselves then what it occurs to us to
build an architect what it occurs to us
to create in our social systems when it
occurs for us to create all around us is
something that is a protective mechanism
against the fear of other so I think
that like the best thing I can do for
all of you
the best thing I can do for me is to
heal the divide and we can all do that
you're gonna have your unique way of
doing that in your life but we can all
work on that as a collective culture and
then guess what we all have the same
role even when we participate in it
differently which is that we are all
culture shifters and I realized that I
could be a culture shifter because to
interact with me was to feel someone who
was more and more integrated who was
more and more connected and who was more
and more expanded rather than more and
more separated disconnected and
disintegrated and so my work in the
world is to heal that divide and that is
my trim tab it's one of the trim tabs
that I work on and then the last thing I
want to say about that cuz she threw in
community she asked me really long big
question re yeah yeah which is thick not
Han Buddhist beautiful man said that the
next Buddha is a Sangha which to me
means
the next phase of our enlightenment as a
culture is not just our individually
going inside and being enlightened yes
that's a piece please do that but that
the next evolutionary movement that we
actually need is a collective one is a
community movement where we actually are
incapable of healing ourselves fully
until we realize the power of community
of tribe to help create the atmosphere
that creates transparency truth trust
because that is what will shield the
fear that is making all of the poor
decision making that is leading to the
systems that all need to change and so I
see community and community building as
one of the richest places for us to
create the atmosphere by which we can
heal love heal the divide feel less less
scared and less afraid and then make
good decisions about the world we want
to create for the next couple of days do
you have any exercises or ideas for ways
that people can play with healing lists
this weekend and experimenting with it
this weekend
hmmm let me see how can I do this
society I'm gonna try to give this as as
quickly as possible
drop dry yourself if you have a notebook
if you feel like it you can also just
listen a square with four boxes on the
top are on the bottom side going down
you go
masculine and then feminine right now
split the top feminine the bottom either
way you can switch them I'm not giving
priority either way and then across the
the top line I want you to write active
and passive so you should have masculine
and feminine active passive top corner
the active masculine this is the force
of penetration right you penetrate the
space with who you are and what you
value no room goes left unscathed we
feel you we know you when you're present
and in the room this is the active
masculine you can practice this arm and
integrate this as part of who you are
next box over passive masculine holding
space
this is another form of power this is
another form of interacting in a
community if all you did was penetrate
and film on the space you never left
room for anyone we've all met those
people they don't stop talking if you
can't use space you cannot leave room
for another person's beauty and
brilliance and this is like a strong
safe container like hive is created for
us to be our most brilliant cells quiet
listen make it safe make it make their
brilliance be what it's about instead of
you
that's the passive masculine form of
power and influence in a community
bottom two squares let's get into the
feminine so wanna go backwards so the
passive feminine so the active feminine
is penetrating the space with your
energy so that you are felt the passive
feminine is an equally powerful force
which is seducing attracting it's the
magnetic pole it's seducing you from a
million miles
you just have to occupy the same space
that that person is in because what they
are saying is so compelling and draws
you in
you are seduced you are love itself and
that's another form of power of anger
interactions to to integrate passive
feminine Helen of Troy launched a
thousand ships with her eyes
Martin Luther King with his speeches had
hundreds of thousands millions of people
rally to his cause you are a maverick if
you can't rally and attract and drop at
the wind power last quadrant the active
feminine
of just Johnson is here real
now that's a powerful force that's
penetrating my space I don't know about
yours the act feminine drops the agenda
that the act of masculine holds this is
what we're doing this is my agenda this
is what we're going this is what we
don't want you to do and instead listens
is completely spontaneous and intuitive
and creative she feels the field which
includes not just herself and her
desires but the entire room so imagine
four motive you could expand your
consciousness to include the entire
ecosystem but especially the one in this
room and you spoke from the field and
you said this is what I feel the
feelings so that practice those faces
in the community environment where you
breathe not the one that's comfortable
but the one that's most needed where
agility and grace and your movement
between those four is the goal with a
jillion grace I penetrate and tell you
who I am and what I value and then I
draw you in and draw you to a cause
that's that's important and then I hold
space for your brilliance to come out
and then I listen to the field and say
this is what's needed and if with a
Jillian brace you can bring that to your
community this to me as a practice of
integration so fun to watch her embody
each of the forests she's describing
[Applause]
maybe we can do a workshop during lunch
or something
I'm gonna turn back to you now and I'd
be curious for you to share a bit about
your work with neuro hacker and for what
you see is the future of nootropics
and different technologies that will
interrelate with people in the human
body and how we'll be able to enhance
our systems
over time what that will look like okay
it's a very different direction me to do
that it's something that ties just kind
of piggybacking on with Jennifer shirts
and it ties it all together we can think
of anything as a relationship or as a
complex set of relationships of other
things where the relationships actually
add and that novelty we're just
understanding the parts in isolation
isn't enough right there's synergy
there's emergent behaviors of the holes
you don't you don't predict just by the
big McCourt's taken separately that's
the name of this talk has to do a
visioning if you train the systems right
that's a Systems Theory another way of
saying it is that everything is an
interrelationship of other things
it's a synergistically aq8 actuated
emergent property of other things
Fritjof Capra the great systems thinker
has this really beautiful way of saying
it resists do you think of a molecule as
a complex relationship between the atoms
that make it up and then that between
the fundamental particles that make it
up and you can keep going to where there
isn't actually a fundamental atomistic
thing that we can think of universe as
an inner relationship of
interrelationships of thought thought
thought Einstein said it's an optical
delusion of consciousness to believe
that there are separate things when in
reality there's this one can't even call
it a thing as this one reality we call
it universe Tom spoke to that right he
spoke to the he's actually eight or nine
or ten other people and even if it
wasn't for the blood transfusion he
talks about how his breath and
everything else makes him other people
and not yet was there millions of people
all the time yeah yeah keep going and
not just his body but his thoughts came
from other people his language right
Jennifer is talking about this in actual
human relationships but we can really
think of we can think of economics as a
process of mediating relationships
and you can have macroeconomic
structures that do that better and worse
in terms of certain properties we can
you think of everything that way and so
we've kind of taken it I've taken the
kind of complex systems whole systems
approach to problems that didn't have
adequate solutions that I cared about in
different areas like social systems and
environments and medicine because when
you have very complex systems we have a
lot of interacting parts and complex
causal models then understanding one
Parden kind of changing that doesn't end
up being adequate most of the time like
Tom's story about some motivation and
that health crucible I also had kind of
diagnosis of incurable autoimmune or a
degenerative illness and it was both
incurable in the allopathic space in and
the integrative medicine space and so I
was like cool the only we can figure
this one out is to actually really model
what's happening which tissues are being
damaged by which chemicals what Cascades
could cause those and it required one of
the things that I found was I was like
alright for these diseases there's some
statistical correlation of this disease
was with this possible cause but it's
not perfect
someone for what right but there's also
some statistical correlation with this
cause in this cause and that was true
over several thousand distinct causes
some toxins and genetics of nutritional
deficiencies and pathogens and
structural issues and so petty say
alright well maybe a disease like MS or
like ALS or it's not one thing it's a
set of symptoms that can have many
different causal pathways that come in
and maybe it's not even the same thing
in any two people right maybe it is a a
kind of causal cascade that some number
of things can trigger and so I started
kind of looking at how do we how do we
inventory how do we ontology is that
space and then do the differential
diagnosis to see which of those things
are happening and how to reverse it so
that rabbit hole ended up leading to
very fortunately me figuring out how to
reverse those illnesses and myself and
then in the process of course everyone
who's around me that also had in her
we went through those and that was in
autoimmunity and nerdy genin cancers and
specifically chronic complex disease not
acute disease for which allopathic
medicine is usually fairly good because
it's got kind of specific causation and
so then that led to really diving into
are there fundamentally better solutions
for all disease and illness and is it
likely that they are not the same
solution for different people so really
diving into personalized medicine and
that's not just in psycho neuro space
we're kind of focusing in psycho neuro
to begin with because we've got you know
insights that we can work with there but
then that expands to Narada Genesis to
medicine and then human wellness kind of
holistically and then beyond human
wellness right social systems and is the
same model applied at scale but so we
started to look at for any particular
pathology what are all of the kind of
causes that could bring that about
how do we identify what the specific
combinatoric of potentially
n-dimensional partial causes are and
then how do we identify specific
therapeutic protocols you think about a
clinical trial is one intervention
across a whole range of people
and we're trying to see do we have some
statistical significance beyond the
placebo but if I want to do personalized
medicine I'm looking at your genome your
metabolomic chemistry your causes I need
to optimize for N equals one we need
totally different methodology different
epistemology so developing that
methodology of this motion so one of the
things that that led to is we have a
neural technology company that is
working on the whole space right now in
ER of kind of neuropsychiatric things so
anxiety depression mental illness
cognitive issues in both on the kind of
enhancement side can we fundamentally
enhance human cognitive capability can
we fundamentally enhance psycho
emotional capability when you think
about empathy runs on specific neural
networks mediated by neural chemistry
mediated by many complex physiologic
processes can we up regulate those
physiologic processes can we up regulate
the physiology that's involved in
impulse control and complex thinking and
the answer ends up being very happily
yes
and then the enhancement also that same
model can address the disease model
cyber where we're working and everything
from kind of transcranial stimulation
technologies to genomic technologies to
kind of biochem technologies but beyond
legs a personal driver of anything about
how much suffering we can alleviate at
the human level like if you've ever had
mental illness in your family or illness
of any kinds and you see again you've
seen people experiencing this experience
it yourself and then think about the
scale at which it happens these are some
of the great issues we want to address
right but not just human suffering for
how do we make someone's quality of life
better but when you start to realize
that most of the things we want to
change in the world actually involve
changing human behavior that's causing
those problems and/or where different
human behavior could bring about the
solution to those problems our patterns
of behavior partly physiologically
influenced
not totally physiologically influenced
there's mimetic thought belief system
influences there are social structure
influences we have to address all of
those so that biology piece is necessary
but not sufficient for addressing some
of the elements that condition human
behavior but the idea of can we actually
address the physiology of psychopathy
right that's a big deal if we can and
the answer again surprisingly ends up
being out there's a lot that we can do
about that to then imagine a world in
which everyone's bio bio physiology is
predisposed for very high level of
empathy for a very high level of
emotional intelligence or can cognitive
capacity to sync with nuanced and
complex complexity then of course you
have to actually have the software set
you have to have training and education
animatics but you have to process those
things so that's why we're addressing
this you know particularly thank you and
I've had a few friends who've tried
qualia which is their first product and
I these are friends I've known for years
and seeing them after taking it for a
week I'm saying you're more grounded and
present and happy and empathetic and
I've ever seen you what happened I said
oh I tried qualia do you notice the
difference so it's a bit like that movie
limitless have you all seen the movie
limitless so if you haven't tried it
it's an incredible experience I am I
love it
so don't tell anybody outside of this
room but this is there's a Trojan horse
actually right we wanted to see they're
not that many people searching how do I
increase my empathy online but there are
a lot of people looking for some
competitive advantage and we see the
kind of red bull off-label adderall etc
markets and we want
see what can we enhance people's
Cottenham capability in a way that
provides immediate noticeable benefit so
instead of using off-label adderall they
could use this that doesn't have the
side effects that actually has long-term
positives these every one of these
criteria adding to how hard this is and
that in addition to improving cognitum
proved psycho-emotional metrics but we
don't even have to talk about that right
they could just be like a cool side
effect and we started with bringing that
product into market before some of the
other ones because it ends up being the
regulatory processes and the spacer
comfortable complex itself
yeah so I think Tom maybe I'll turn it
over to you now and I would be curious
Daniel was just talking about individual
human physiology and I'm curious you've
thought a lot about as everyone on this
panel has about different systems and
structures and kind of the future of
entrepreneurship and business and how we
can transform business to transform the
planet
can you speak a bit to your vision so
she was like super cool is like
everybody came to the same conclusion
but like a totally different ways to
check this out so I went into the world
and it's like okay well I'm good at
inventing stuff so I just like 75
patents I've invented maybe 10 times
more stuff than iPad it did pretty good
inventing stuff and it's like really
fast and inventing stuff too I'm really
good at teaching people how to go do
those things so that's all good so my
first thought was like let me just go
out in the world and I'll like working
these villages and I'll work with these
people in government don't work with
these people
there are executives like we'll teach
him how to go solve these problems real
fast and I would totally go in there and
I would totally teach them to do it and
when I was like sitting right next to
them they'd be solving the problems 10
times faster a hundred times faster
maybe like this is freaking fantastic
it's amazing and all this stuff was
happening but then when I would leave
then little by little they would like
turn back to normal and I was like what
is this about right here it's actually
like we know how to do it it's not even
that we don't even know it's not that we
don't know what to do or that there's no
way to do it it's like even if I go to
you and show you how to do the thing
you want to do you don't do it that's
really weird and I started to recognize
that like there's these outer challenges
which are yes poverty and you know
access to clean water and economic
inequality and just I can go on and on
there's like a bunch of them that matter
and a bunch of I'm working on it's fine
there's pull me aside if you want to
talk about it ourselves but actually the
main problem is the inner stuff right
basically there's a realization that we
have the world that we do because we
think the way that we do right and
unless we fix it in here then it's never
going to get fixed out there so I mean
this is a great example so I was in the
guatemalan cloud forest with my friend
Juan who's driving a pickup truck and
we're bouncing around trying to get to
this remote village to get them solar
power for the first time ever cool but
because of that we have like all these
hours in the jungle because it's like
there's no roads like this is you go
like four miles per hour or something
even though you're in a truck takes
freaky forever to get anywhere so we
have like four or five hours in this
truck and sometimes during that that
trip he's like Tom you know maybe it's
too late to create a sustainable planet
maybe maybe if we only had us half as
many people you know population wise did
so many I mean it's not I'm not saying
like kill everybody's like imagine like
if the world only had half as many
people like maybe we could make a
sustainable planet then and like this
just came out of nowhere I would like
was not even thinking but as soon as he
said that was like 1 we had half as many
people in the world 40 years ago and if
we keep thinking the way that we do it
doesn't matter we could have half as
many people today and we would have
exactly the same problems in 40 years
problems not out there it's in here and
what you guys just said is exactly that
there's just you're coming from like the
okay well how do we inspire epithelia
you know you know different approaches
how do we heal relationships from the
inside out starting with the
relationship with yourself and I'm
basically trying to work on the same
thing I call it the psychological
antecedents to global prosperity
whatever I'm not a marketing person but
that's a very accurate term for what I'm
talking about
can you pick that the psychological
antecedents of global prosperity
how would you need to think in order to
have an awesome world that's another way
to say it but like my approach to it is
like different than these two other
approaches where my approach is like
well let me figure out these like really
interesting ways to teach that like
stick with people that challenge I
consider it most like more like there's
bugs in the operating system of
collective consciousness and like me as
like an engineer or programmer is going
to debug it and the way that and will be
dot B is that debug is not by
overwriting lines of code in your brain
but like inserting like these little
procedures they're like Zen cones but
keep on unpacking themselves forever
inside of your brain until you're like
holy crap so I don't know I'll just
share a couple super quickly but that's
not even the vision that like I think
Nadia's asked ago so I'll do that super
quickly because that's not the point so
check it out so one of them is is
knowing as the enemy of learning and
people are like oh wait a second
knowingly oh they are kind of different
oh yeah and actually when I'm in a state
of knowing and actually I have a whole
talk about it but basically it says that
when you're in a state of no way it's
literally impossible to learn and
anything that you actually want to
improve or change you need to be in the
state of learning about and I see people
constantly in a state of knowing in fact
what we do on TV is we bring experts
onboard and experts are constantly in
the state of knowing right if you ever
wanted anything to be different about
the world do not bring a bunch of
experts to share their opinions not
because expertise is not useful but
using your mind in a state of knowing
which is what experts are asked to do is
very toxic to change
anything go ahead and bring those same
experts but get them into a state of
learning say here's the thing that we
don't know how to solve together roll up
your sleeves were solving right don't
ask for their opinions about things that
will move everybody into a state of
knowing another simple one is we built
an entire society built off of the debug
that net worth equals human worth right
like nobody gets on the map when does
the actor or actress get on the magazine
cover when they have the movie where
they make twenty million dollars were
they a much worse actor or actress six
months prior no they were just as
interesting just as compelling just as
amazing as people and at the moment that
their net worth changes we think that
their human worth changes we do not
question this very often every single
thing that you've seen in the media
every single thing like why you talk
about some people not other people is
exactly built off of this belief and the
more that you pay attention to us
believe the more that you understand is
completely untrue right and the more
that you understand it's not true
then the more that you'll construct a
life based on the stuff that actually is
true everybody actually matters and
there's a lot of interesting stuff from
everybody and that there's a type of
worth that you will receive from
everybody if you can just hear them
anyway that's not the important stuff
we're gonna get okay but visions there's
all this stuff so yes so I had this
whole thing where I like wanted to be a
corporate executive because my whole
thought was like I'd be a corporate
executive via top executive a fortune
500 company and I'll push him over to be
100% sustainable and that will be like a
really good mark but then like at some
point like when I left my executive job
I was like in the jungles in Hawaii and
I was like huh how good was my goal so I
like whipped out it thinks I have a
spreadsheet in the jungles of Hawaii
that's me so then I like started
calculating the thing and I'm like what
if I got that goal a hundred percent
right what if I became the CEO not just
any executive the top executive with the
largest organization in the world and
made it a hundred percent sustainable
what percentage the global economy
I effect and it turned out that at that
point in time the largest corporation in
the world's Walmart and I calculated
exactly what percentage the global
economy like Walmart directly impacts
and so imagine that's how much you could
make sustainable the answer is 0.4% and
I was like I picked the wrong goal I'm
an idiot and I was like this is
completely ludicrous we need an entirely
different framework for this so long
story short I like dug in the
spreadsheets and like did a gajillion
calculations for for two days and at the
end of it I realized that there's really
only like 17 industries that make up 95%
in the global economy there's only four
possible outcomes from them relative to
a sustainable future they either need to
grow quickly die quickly grow slowly or
die slowly right and you can just mark
the industry and say this is what's
gonna happen to you in the next 50 years
if we're gonna have a sustainable planet
but not only did I get there I was like
holy crap
maybe that may not be enough because
actually when you go into the stuff and
there's a very long discussion of that
way that may not be enough but there is
a further realization where it's like
that should not be the goal the goal
should be the following the goal is that
humanity needs to become a net positive
to nature there's no other situation
where we survive like like our best
plans are like let's it up a little
bit slower but then it's like okay well
you don't like destroy the planet in 50
years you just try it in 150 years nice
job right or we think Willis how about
sustainable sustainable is pretty good
but here's the difficulty about
sustainable especially when it comes to
the economic frame things are
sustainable they tend to be like this
careful connection of what is works in
with the environment that's part of the
environmental sustainability what works
with the market and what works with
current technology the problem with that
is technology in the market are
constantly changing so like even if you
made a company that was doing stuff
totally sustainably right now you fast
forward 20 years
technology market is super different and
your things broken and every single time
that it's broken even by a little bit
it's a lag period where you're not fully
sustainable so even sustainable is not
sustainable because sustainable as
defined right now has a type of
fragility to it the net output of
humanity needs to be more people that
there are we need to add more topsoil
per year the more people that there are
then we need to have cleaner water and
cleaner air every single year
the more people that there are the more
that we need to like encourage the
return of species biodiversity and all
the environments that we have any care
over which at this point is the whole
birth so that's kind of what's up that's
enough we're good say because we worked
to get a little bit on the emergence
project and what I love about what you
are saying tom is is something that I
feel like we never question which is
that like the very purpose of our
projects the very purpose of our
businesses the very purpose of our lives
is to grow and consume and grow and
consume some more and grow and consume
some more which is absolutely
appropriate in an adolescent
prepubescent early developmental stage
like if you look at a biological kind of
organism there is a time when you are
growing from like a single cell to
trillions and you need to grow and
consume in order to develop into the
adult phase and just what I'm hearing
and what you said and something I want
us to look at for a moment is this
developmental phase is just a
developmental one and yet we are
arrested ourselves in this phase what we
think the purpose of our business is to
grow every year and extract more and
more profit I mean how many of you have
ever questioned whether the purpose of
your business each year upon year could
be maybe not how do I make it bigger and
have it
at work like that's not something most
of us thank God there's a few of you
it's great but what would I feel like
you know something that Dan and I talked
a lot about when we work together was
the need for us to transition out of the
growth consumption mindset because we
have we've done that we're here we're
beyond that phase and there's a there's
a more mature phase to me which is
marked by what he's saying which is
marked by being regenerative adaptive
Omni considerate to use one of my
favorite words from Daniel right so
imagine if every project every business
everything that we approached had those
primary principles that it is adaptive
regenerative and Omni considerate
meaning in our systems thinking approach
we consider the impact on all not just
ourselves our bottom line not just on
our company not just on our industry not
just in our city but on us being not
just our own kind of people but citizens
of planet Earth you know Barbara Marx
Hubbard we have Patricia in the in the
room and her sister is a dear friend and
she talks a lot about us real like
reimagining ourselves not as you know
I'm Jennifer and I'm from Texas or I
live in California but I'm a citizen of
planet Earth and that if you just shift
into that mindset and you shift your
thinking around how you organize your
projects such that they are at their
bases regenerative on me considering
and adaptive then we're going to be a
lot better off and so I just encourage
that I mean I was inspired by what you
said Tom and by you know work I've done
the dam though so just wanted to add
that thank you to that perhaps specific
examples of organizations or initiatives
that you've seen that are working
towards a different reality and what
they're doing and what their vision is
perhaps in macroeconomics sir yeah so
coming back to the topic for a moment of
interconnectedness and actually
understanding our interconnectedness
with each other with the planet with the
topsoil with everything else just quick
exercise think about yourself and then
think about who you would be without the
atmosphere and you realized very quickly
it's a nonsense question right like it
wouldn't be anything you wouldn't exist
so do you think about who would you be
without all of the plants and trees and
and allergies that make the atmosphere
and you wouldn't be in existing would
you be without the gravitation and the
electromagnetism and the forces of
universe that actually make our planet
work would you be without the previous
people that developed a language in
which you think and process the world
and you realized that the idea of I the
way we usually think of I as a separate
concept as a misnomer it's a wrong
concept because we like to typically
think of me my consciousness associated
with this body and maybe being kind of
on the inside of it and maybe kind of
traditional neuro scientific framework
as maybe consciousness is an emergent
property of brains or this kind of
system but my sense of self daniel myths
is actually an emergent property of this
self-organizing system of the rest of
universe and yes maybe if a particular
brain region is damaged at capacity is
lost but also changes out here change
sense of self right so when you get that
and you really kind of take deeply the
way I have thought of I that doesn't
include the rest of universe
home way of thinking so then the idea of
separate interest and especially not
just separate interest but even
competitive interest the idea that I
could advantage myself at the expense of
something else that is actually defining
to what I am is not just a misnomer it
is pathological right in the deepest
kind of sense when we think about
burning witches because which meant that
they used herbs instead of just prayer
or something like that and the you know
the Dark Ages we we can think of that
now as a bit of social insanity of the
of the whole group of people right that
there are a whole group of people that
bought into a concept that was not just
wrong or silly but it but criminally
insane but what we don't get is that we
actually still have a Bick witnessed
insanity that is driving give or take 13
species to extinction every day its
depleting the topsoil rather than
growing in this that's thinking and if
we think of insanity psychosis says
believing stuff that isn't true and then
can pathological insanity is acting on
that in ways that actually cause
fundamental harm then we've got this
we've got social ubiquitous insanity we
have to address right so the concept of
separate balance sheets at the level of
the individual or corporation or a
country that can grow by externalizing
harm to the Commons or somewhere else is
actually underneath so many of our
problems great in relationship the idea
that you can never win a fight with your
spouse to complete nonsense concept if
you really factor all the extra maladies
and cause and effect equations or the
idea that our life can actually get
better by winning a war which is a
nonsense concept right so there's really
only one balance sheet that matters
which is the balance sheet of all
universe and to just kind of bring it
back from it and we can think of the
balance sheet of this biosphere because
we have very deep interaction you
and so then we say well how do I
dedicate my life to evolving the balance
sheet of this biosphere of the Commons
and everyone's access to it and if you
think about Tom's question of it the
biggest companies in the world still
represent the tiniest fraction of global
movement of resources we say ok eken
depending upon how you measure it if you
consider derivatives money or not or
narrow money or there's different
numbers but one of this kind of central
numbers is the amount of dollars that
changes hands every day is in the
vicinity of 70 trillion well think about
if 70 trillion dollars trade hands every
day almost every one of them externalize
as some harm to the Commons right almost
every product involved unhhhh renewable
mining and in distribution and etc that
creates pollution many of these things
irreversible and even service economies
exist on top of product economies that
mediate them so if I've got 70 trillion
dollars trading hands every day
externalizing harm towards points of
chemical irreversibility meaning the end
of the planets life support systems even
if I had a billion dollars of non profit
money per day that didn't have to make
money that just got to be allocated to
solving problems it's like five orders
of magnitude too small so in that
equation that I looked at you know
earlier of well why are we treating the
cows this way well it was an economics
equation of they weren't sentient things
they were commodities and we were
looking at you know optimization of a
balance sheet in a very narrow way when
we were looking at whaling that whale is
a million dollars of economic advantage
on a Japanese fishing boat but it's
worth noting alive in the ocean on
anyone's balance sheet now happens to be
on nature's balance sheet
being relevant to all of our life but it
provides no real-time this quarter this
state differential advantage to me to
leave it up there but I get immediate
differential advantage to kill but
that's also true for the old-growth
forests if I cut them down
that trees 100 grand is two-by-fours but
it's worth nothing alive even though it
maintains the atmosphere without which I
don't exist that overly narrow overly
short term nonsensical thinking is
driving you know whether we want to look
at species extinction or topsoil erosion
or or bad health care issues or a
for-profit military-industrial complex
that is invested in ongoing war or any
of those things that we have so we say
alright can we have a macroeconomic
system where themes are worth more to us
dead and alive and we actually need that
because if I don't get stuff then my
kids starve and then once they are done
starving they don't get to go to college
and so every level of Maslow's hierarchy
requires me getting stuff where that is
an extinction area macroeconomic system
so then it's how could we change that
macroeconomic system cuz economics is
right at the interface between our
values right do I value the whale alive
do I value it right it's a value system
that is codified as a value equation
gold is worth this much per ounce
oxygens worth how much
well that function is abundant enough
that we don't really make it worth
anything which is why the balance sheet
calculation will drive us to burn inland
but the gold is worth enough that will
damage whole ecosystems to go get even
though then all we're gonna do is stick
it in safes that provide no real
meaningful value to anyone because it's
just based on a nonsense concept of
scarcity that if there's not that much
of it not everybody can have it and so
if I have it I get differential
competitive advantage over the other
people that actually define my existence
this this is pathologic insanity right
so if I can't live for four minutes
without oxygen it should be on the top
of the value equation it drives
the decision so what would it mean to
restructure macroeconomics where we
didn't think of other sentient things as
resources but we thought of them as also
beneficiaries of the Commons what would
it mean to have living things be worth
more in real measurable macroeconomic
terms algorithmic terms than they are
worth debt what would it mean to
internalize every externality so that my
own getting ahead and my Omni positive
effect on all that I affect are the same
thing well it doesn't look anything like
any version of capitalism that's ever
been proposed but it's important to get
that when you look at the conversations
of Marx or Adam Smith and they talk
about how do we deal with the labor
economy and incentive to do the shitty
jobs and but then we have technological
automation of all the shitty jobs we're
changing the axioms like we're
technologically changing the axioms of
why we thought the best way to do stuff
is the best way of doing it when right
now Internet of Things is bringing us to
a place where we have a near-term
ability to have a sensor driven balance
sheet of the comment or we can actually
measure the entire natural and built
world Commons in real time inventory I
have a balance sheet for it and then be
able to use complex data science to
optimize the allocation of all the
world's resources to meeting all the
world's needs that wasn't something that
Adam Smith or Karl Marx would have
thought about so if that means we
actually have to rethink our two
foundational axioms of how we do
right and if I could kind of leave
anyone leave people here with anything
it would be whatever you think are the
fundamental frameworks of truth that you
have to think within question those
things and question if those
foundational frameworks are not only
maybe not true but fundamentally
problematic
right and look at how can we redesign
civilization in terms of our definition
of self in terms of macroeconomics in
terms of governance in terms of what we
think love is in terms of in a way that
is adequate to what's really needed and
aligned with our highest potential the
audience don't you just like talking
about each human being in their highest
potential and one of the things that
we'll talk about tomorrow during the
designing your life days the question of
what brings you most alive and what
brings you most in flow I'm curious for
each of you when you feel like your most
and flow in service and being at your
highest when you're in service and how
you've learned when that is and design
your life around that and any other kind
of philosophies that you use and values
that you use to lead your life on day to
day basis
guess I'm supposed to go okay let's see
baggies I'm sorry that's kind of like
really broad and there's lots of thing
for me to be in flow so that there is
there's like a phrase which is like you
can tell a lot of person about a person
by what gets them up in the morning and
what keeps them up at night and so you
answer those two questions you'll
understand what your fundamental hope is
and what your fundamental fear is my
fundamental hope is that humanity can be
a net positive to nature and I like wake
up every day like what can I do today
that is gonna be part of doing that
thing I have like a realistic
sensibility that it took us thousands of
years to mess it up this bad that might
take us a thousand years to dig out of
it even if we like really got on it so
really my lifetime might be two percent
of it and like let me do as much of the
two percent as I can then or let me pull
people you know and find other inspired
people that like want to go on the
journey of the two percent like healing
it in this time period and I think those
things actually helped me a lot because
I feel like the things that stalled
people is a type of it ambitions kind of
great but there's like the attachment to
the fruits of ambition that like really
screw people up and if I were to like
you know roll out there and be like I'm
gonna be the person that makes it so
that you know this thousand year
transition happens in my lifetime you
know it's I don't know like some other
part of my body would explode not just
my GI tract disaster I'd be dead
tomorrow probably so huh so like for a
second absolutely look at your ambitions
and be like like for me it helps me a
lot like so there's another phrase that
says it's not what a goal is it's what a
goal does so that formulation of my goal
helps me a lot to know that I might only
get 2% done but it's 2% does like right
down that Lane I'm all over at them if I
tried to internalize 100%
much is like my brain likes to like ramp
stretch around the like saran wrap and
stretch around it and like try to
understand the hundred percent like I
recognize I won't change 100 percent and
it would like explode me to like try to
go do it also let me say what's the 2%
that we're gonna start on what's the
trim tab that we can start to nudge but
even that it'll probably be a you know
three dozen trim tabs across you know
millions of people and that it all right
and like I love that actually like what
that goal does to me is it like it it
like starts to fan out into well what
are you actually gonna do to make it
happen
obviously you need to wake up every day
and then do something about it but since
you're not going to do a hundred percent
of it like how do you inspire the next
set of people to get to do some of the
things how do you attract a bunch of
people to work on some of the things
that you're working on right now like
how do you keep on requesting and
filtering down and getting to the
essentials of what's gonna make a
difference today as opposed to what just
looks good or it gets a lot of you know
likes on social media right and it's
like my first stop was as a physicist
and it's like at the end of the day like
matter energy you know is gonna change
or nothing changed right so like when I
see like things or it's like oh this is
a person that's so good at like online
whatever and I'm like well what what
were the atoms that changed and if
nothing changed and I'm like well
nothing changed and I'm not trying to be
a jerk it's just like let's keep it
practical let's keep it really clean
let's stick with our the atoms and the
energy changing if it isn't then let's
just go back to it and see if there's
another way to do it where the atoms and
energy would change a little bit more
and if that not that then we'll try it
again a little bit more try it again a
little bit more but eventually you'll
figure out how to do your two percent
and that's all right like that's all
you're gonna do in this life and I think
it's phenomenal so that's
probably all
so I think the question is like what
puts you in that flow state right um
I'll tell you what takes me out of it
is a shadow I see you know in our
culture on the edge is you with you with
you if I can bring myself geographically
physically emotionally mentally and
spiritually near the thing I want to
impact and have that my consciousness be
located where it is as close as I can
get it where it is part of me and I am
part of it then I am not the one that
needs to be smart I never will be
because I am sourcing my motivations my
intelligence my resources from everyone
who cares about that thing you know if I
focus my my my reality on solving
poverty then there's billions of people
that care about solving that and now I
have the resources of all of them on my
side cheering me on and when I can take
my focus my consciousness my
identification and put it out there not
be all the way absorbed in my own
experience but actually include you in
my experience all of a sudden when you
have a yearning question and it's real
excited me talking anymore
it's you in your Higher Self and mine
having a conversation and I just do one
of the deliverers and one of the faces
for you as you are for me
and so for me that's where flow state
occurs is when I can identify with a
larger concern and that's what I do the
second thing I do is meditation which
may sound paradoxical
all right so meditation is a little bit
about taking out all of the stimulus for
a moment we are so stimulated and for me
it's a practice of getting comfort in
the discomfort of the fertile void where
there is nothing and I don't have
anything adulterating my consciousness
and then I allow what needs to arise
it's kind of like the active feminine
form of power and influence that is my
leadership model that I teach I get into
that and see what is the field when I
kind of reduce all of the other stimuli
what is the intuition say you know we
have two forms of intelligence in my
it's a gross over generalization but we
have like a discriminative mind that if
valuates
compares looks at past and sees what
should we do based on what's happened
and before it's it's an incredible form
of intelligence we need that form but
there's the intuitive mind and the
intuitive mind is pulling vast multiple
simultaneous inputs all at once it's so
vast that we can't actually compress it
and understand it so it comes as an
impulse from that fro void and it's so
much more intelligent because this
intelligence includes all of us and all
life so my practice is to either locate
myself with you out of my self
absorption or with the challenge and all
of the resources that are available
there or to cut the stimulus and go into
the intuitive fertile void and feel the
field and from there I just marvel at
the creativity that I am just a humble
receiver of so Jennifer actually shared
something that triggered a deep Blake
philosophy you see how she practices the
intuitive intelligence and the analytic
both rate and the masculine and the
feminine and the active and the you know
passive one of the deep kind of life
philosophies for me is transcending and
reconciling false dichotomies so if my
logical thinking about something and my
intuitive sense on something are in
conflict
I don't move forward with either until
they're not in conflict because they're
actually both meaningful types of
intelligence and one of them or both of
them are not fully there yet if they
haven't brought me to a commensurate
place so that's kind of a key thing
right if you think that they're just the
fundamental internal conflict where you
go with one of them and I don't think
you respect either of those tools enough
if what it seems like is gonna be in my
best interest and what's in the best
interest of someone else seem in
conflict they don't move forward until
I've reconciled that
my best interest in the interest of
everyone affected are simultaneously
optimized by the same strategy we can
kind of see this everywhere where it's
like when you understand how
interconnected universe is then you
realize that everything that matters is
inter commensurate and none of it in
fundamental on reconcilable dichotomy
this is key to so many things so it's
like do I want to love the moment
exactly the way it is or do I want to
work to make a better future and the
answer is against both right and those
are totally reconcilable without a weird
thought of paradox because as Tom said
were more verbs and we are nouns and all
existence is more verb than noun into
becoming blossoming process what I love
the moment as it is it's not a static
thing loving it as it is means stasis it
means I love also the impulse to grow
and evolve Express within it and when I
love that actively I want to help help
it right do I love and accept myself
unconditionally or work to help myself
evolve yes right so I would look at any
place where there are what seemed like
false dichotomies where you have to
damage or neglect something you care
about to move forward on something else
you care about and don't do that and
then make it a design challenge to say
how do i optimize all of the things I
care about simultaneously and then
that's the sign that it might be a good
strategy that's one of my kind of deep
practices go up first
oh hi is that too that's too loud good
perfect oh it's cool thanks dad
yes I am my name is Sloane but I have
this moniker called sodas so I go buy
sodas some four-star generals were like
really confused by this they're like
what the hell is sodas and I was like hi
I'm Secretary of Information state and
then I'm you know just they're trying to
say okay I've been working on an
economic plan that's like gonna unite
the whole world and I've delivered
insights so we can start changing stuff
and that like power dynamics are gonna
shred and then we can like look equally
and I'm not so scary so my question is
like being I this is like a pro bono
gift to the world writing a bio to come
here was like really hard
congratulations to all of you awesome
people because you can define ourselves
I'm just trying to get to work in
liaising intelligence - like seriously
pave a road to accountability because
there's no failure to innovate it's like
literally a failure to communicate and
my greatest gift is meeting you guys
because I've been on this planet 28
years I've never met anyone like me and
I don't know how to fund me because this
thing was like I go into a meeting I'm
like this is a seesaw effect here was
national security
here's consumer this was like insights
here's innovation this is how everybody
else got these really complicated
products that we do every single day and
then there's like this triangle which
was the fulcrum of the seesaw which is
like the insights and then everybody
needs the data now to like do stuff whoa
how do we do it so my question is how do
we do it together I can't do it alone
anymore
and you guys work on brain stuff I liked
spent the past year detangling my brains
I understand human cognition and stuff
like that and it's really cool but if we
keep click click click click clicking
into interface to interface we're gonna
lose the fact that the last secure thing
is our mind and that is so insecure so
we really need to start instituting new
beliefs and new customs and you know
culture universally in this information
sea to pass that down baggage there next
generations and like that too that's the
big question so that's not a direct
question that's like for everybody here
ok cool thanks thanks ok that's great
that's amazing so check it out there's a
big difference between like knowing
what's gonna need to happen and the
doing of this stuff and what I'll say is
that your worry and frustration are not
your friend like basically you're
worrying freshmen people have the belief
that if something's really important you
got to worry about it more but when
you're worried about it more you're
bringing less of yourself the worry
itself is like a battle brain your brain
sucks when it's worried you can't be
creative you can't find connections you
can't connect with people very well when
you're worried that's not the youth that
you need to solve the things that you
care about so if you love something you
care about it you want it you you want
to improve it do not worry about it at
all that's you deciding to suck so don't
do that ok number 2 so let it just calm
down it's cool don't worry as much
number two you're gonna run into all
these people and it's gonna be a
disaster you're like man I totally see
it they can't see it at all what's going
on
well here's the thing metabolise ability
is more important than truth what do I
mean by that it means like you need to
say stuff that people can understand it
right so maybe you have been thinking
about this so hard your brain is in like
some PhD level around something and then
you're gonna go talk to a group of
second graders and give your PhD lecture
that is not going to go
that well especially if the output of
your PhD lecture means they lose status
in the world where they need to change
how they do things and so on and so
forth that's crazy town that's the
recipe for you to be frustrated the rest
of your life don't do that instead if
you go into a second-grade classroom
teach third grade and be like hey this
is an enlightening lesson to you right
and like when the second graders hear
that they're like oh follow through
doesn't know about fractions that's
pretty cool man
I like fractions not sure maybe you're
doing like some crazy like whatever
linear algebra difference equation some
crazy-ass stuff who knows right but it's
like forget about it that's not what you
teach you teach what's metabolizable to
the people that you meet so if you meet
some people and all they're gonna do is
and your interaction with them is going
to get them from second to third grade
congratulations that's what you're doing
with them and you meet some other people
and they're in tenth grade and you're
like nice man I get to talk about some
11th grade stuff this is pretty sweet
it's a nice tree and every once are you
gonna run into people you're like look I
haven't run into a bunch of people like
you in me I don't even know what that
means that in 28 years then it's like
great maybe we'll go off and we'll have
like some graduate school talk we'll
have some postdoc talk that'd be that'd
be freaking fun but like don't worry
about it that everybody's not talking
like that like your goal is somebody who
is trying to be of service in the world
is if they're in second grade let's
teach third and actually let me learn
some stuff too because there's some
stuff I can learn from a second grader
that's freaking great it's just so don't
worry so much bring it down to the level
just keep in it yet and yeah just go a
grade up maybe two
[Applause]
[Music]
and mentioned was a question of sort of
the abundance of error for example in
the lack of value how much is their
worth I think some of it probably
doesn't mean we have to recognize our
privilege and being able to sort of take
that step back and see that air has
value versus perhaps the immediate need
for food or water or shelter or whatever
it might be so I'm wondering how you
think about sort of toppling systems
where perhaps some of those thinking not
all of it but is happening in rooms like
this and which is not the room that you
know billions of people in the world
during happening so wondering about that
and and then I personally have been
doing a lot of my work in financial
services and in agriculture in food
security and a lot of sort of my last
seven years of living and working in
Africa has been about like how do we
create new systems for these things that
actually work for smallholder farmers or
for small medium enterprises and my view
is that similarly you know things needs
to be broken and that what's happening
right now with some of the mergers with
a lot of the existing provision of these
services is not working and not
beneficials and wondering if you outside
of the thinking side the brain and found
organizations or models that you think
can actually lead to this new sort of
macro and micro economy
so I'll say something towards that we'll
be able to speak to it adequately in
this time but I'm happy to speak deeper
later and share some things on exactly
those topics one of the things that
happened that was me that was the most
challenging for me early on was we
talked to some of the people at the UN
World Food Programme on how to end world
hunger and they showed their very
comprehensive plan on how to do it and
it involved things like more NPK
fertilizer near a bunch of river deltas
that leads to more dead zones in the
ocean towards the point of actual auto
catalysis the extinction of our entire
species and I said well it's not such a
great plan because you're metric of less
people dying this year is actually good
but we kind of all go extinct if you
succeed too faster and they're like well
that makes sense but those aren't our
metrics were tasked with and I talked to
the guys at the IPCC on climate change
on geoengineering and they're like what
do you think about these particular
sulfates in the atmosphere to reflect
20% of the Sun out so that we get the
temperature down like well here's the
externalities of doing that they're
really bad and you didn't address any of
the underlying cause and here's all the
other things happen that are really bad
and again we're actually accelerating
extinction and they're again like well
those aren't our metrics or metric as
temperature so one of the and I actually
gave up on retrofitting those systems as
others building one is rain and the same
in macroeconomics says anything that is
affected has to be internalized - the
equation that determines incentive
decision-making and how power is
conferred and as long as there's
anything that is external bias to that
gap of externality will be the badness
of the strategy so without getting into
the specifics right now and so it love
to do indefinitely because it sounds
like you're doing really great work I
would say
just like Tom talks about as a design
process like be in the work and make
sure that it's actually you know working
the prototype but another one I would
say is make sure that you're thinking
about the entire system all of the cause
that come
all of the effects coming out make sure
you're internalizing the externalities
and you're factoring complex
cause-and-effect just as a design
thinking for whether you're dealing with
hunger or how to address poverty or the
relationship between hunger and poverty
or the so that's just that's it is
Design Thinking thing make sense and I
just wanted to say forgive me
real quick one more thing to your
question earlier I will triple down on
everything Tom said and feedback to you
one other thing on six I think it
probably comes up for a lot of people
here no one can adequately define
themselves whatever their definition is
is wrong it is a definition of some
function they have or some role they
play which is cool and useful but not
then if you try and be understood by
defining yourself like it's just
you're just never gonna succeed with
that so give up on that totally and the
degree to which you can give up on
wanting to be understood in that way it
will help things go so much better so
when I'm talking to people in they ask
kind of my background I'd like to get
their background first and I say
whatever's relevant about me I don't say
I don't try and have them give me just I
wanted to be relevant so the degree to
which you can decouple your own desire
for belonging being understood with how
to actually be effective on a project
super helpful and then you'll have some
people that you're really close within
or personally that you feel like brought
to you not because of a bio but because
they cross you and those are two
different ways to get those things met
and then it's much easier to do what Tom
said of just share a relevant thing
because it actually is not about any in
a relational process and I would just
kind of share with everybody here if you
are thinking about what the those
guys are so smart or those guys are what
is my unique value proposition the
degree which you can stop thinking that
is really good and just say how can I
help this scenario and like Jennifer
said you get out of the thinking about
me clusterfuck which is just so helpful
because however you define your unique
value proposition is wrong it is
actually ineffable it is a synergistic
emergent that is fundamentally more than
the sum of all the partial definite
you can give so just giving up on that's
really helpful thank you all so so much
I think about a lot to think about that
the world today in their lives tomorrow
and the interconnection between a song
thank you for having us so pleasure
absolute pleasure thank you join me in
thanking Nadia mostiy our moderator for
the panel today
[Applause]
[Music]
and all of you are hi body our community
thank you
I just could sense how checked in
everybody was in this moment and that is
beautiful
that is a beautiful panel and I'm
thrilled Wow I just feel called with the
power of all of this in the collective
journey
you