[Music]
if much of the conversation in the media
looks like a dysfunctional relationship
between men and women Warren Farrell has
a unique perspective he was the most
high-profile male feminist back in the
70s
helping women's voices be heard then
started running men's groups and hearing
men's stories as well he wrote a series
of books and became known as the father
of the men's movement now he teaches
couples counseling to help both men and
women listen to each other stories I'd
love to hear you kind of summarize where
you came from I think you've got a
really interesting perspective having
been part of the women's movement and
and then you're you're now kind of seen
as the father of the men's movement yes
it's ironic I start yeah and I did start
out when I was doing my doctorate at New
York University the women's I was
teaching at Rutgers University at the
time and when the women's movement
surfaced I started incorporating that
into my political science curriculum as
a political movement and my advisors and
I was also doing my doctoral
dissertation at the time and so the
students and at Rutgers were saying man
when you speak about the women's
movement you got fire in your belly
and yeah you should think you know what
are you doing your dissertation on and I
said what I was doing it on which was a
different part of politics and they said
you should think about doing it and
something about the women's movement so
I went to my to my Advisory Committee
and they said oh you know Warren you
don't want to sort of like demean
yourself with taking on some little fad
that's going to be going away in a few
years and I said I don't think this is a
fair that's going to be going away I
think this is a an evolutionary shift
where women are beginning to speak up
and say the old gender roles of the past
were too rigid we're more than just a
role and I think that this is going to
have implications for both women and men
however I do agree that it's a lot of
hostility toward men and you know and it
may take a little bit longer to catch on
among men and so they said if you really
want to go for it that got me deeply
involved and then that led to my being
to the board of directors of the
National Organization for Women in New
York City and then I got reelected for a
few years after that and so I spoke all
around the world on women's issues the
importance of women's issues and why any
secure man should be a supporter of
women being having more flexible roles
and and also the importance of this for
men and for men to be a part of this
process you'll now known as the father
of the men's movement but in in the
States at least the mr1 known as the
m-ras men's rights activists have a
pretty terrible reputation do you think
that any of that is deserved or not yeah
I think somebody's deserved I think some
of it has been strategic you know Paul
Elam who sort of started voice for men
he was he read the myth of male power of
a book I wrote and and he said my god
this is you know this is something that
everybody needs to be aware of and then
but he started but ten years passed and
you know the book had some impact but it
didn't change the cultural dialogue
about men and women and he said well you
know what's what's wrong with Warren
Farrell's myth of male power approach
and he basically said this is what he's
told me directly and he said that what's
wrong with it is that he's so rational
and so thoughtful and he doesn't really
he doesn't get anybody to notice him in
sort of a and doesn't get pressed with
the press needs that you know Warren
Farrell does not understand is they need
to be you know you need to bang them you
need to be outrageous you need to be in
a way stupid and you know and then the
press will pay attention so he began
doing that Nepal ulam is a counselor so
he's not like you know completely dead
to the world man in terms of sensitivity
and so he but he strategically said you
know I'll get the attention of the press
and he did do that and he got the
attention of the press he was right and
but in the process of doing things like
reversing roles and saying here's a you
know here's what women say about men
I'll write an article and just say the
opposite of that and I'm
could make women into the person that is
accused of being ridiculous in one way
or the other and and then the press was
outright outraged then but he also drew
in some people with that method that
were quite anger angry and hurt and so
my I don't agree with many of the things
that were said however I do understand
his strategy and I also take a very
different approach to people who are
angry my attitude toward people who are
angry or what we call people are filled
with hate is to listen to them not argue
with them and people's hatred quotient
is significantly reduced by being heard
and so the very first thing you need to
do to to to help give good therapy to
anyone who you call a hater is to not
yourself be a hater of the haters when
you're a hater of the haters you are a
hater
also and so if your if your job is to be
progressive if you consider yourself a
progressive the first thing we need to
do with every hater every person we
disagree with vehemently every person
who has gotten bitter and angry is to
hear them out to find out every piece of
the puzzle that has contributed to their
worldview picture and when we let them
know that we've not only heard what they
said but we say this is what I hear you
say is that accurate and we keep working
on it until we get an accurate vision of
that and that person can say my god you
will see tears I have seen when I do
that with people see you know when you
hear angry dads talking about the legal
system and how oppressive it is just
change the topic ask them about their
kids ask them about what what's hurting
inside of them that they can't see their
kids and out of the person who's whose
eyes you felt anger and steel coming out
of you will soon see tears coming out of
those eyes and
and the hurt and the pain that led to
that anger and that's what we need to be
focusing on and when we do that and when
people are listening to that way they
don't become the shooters they don't
become the haters so let's be that as
progressive as we claim to be and let's
listen to those that we disagree with
vehement Lee rather than to put them
down and just give them a label that
allows us to discount everything they
feel and everything they say the label
is our statement of our being regressive
not progressive so from the outside one
of the criticisms by the men's rights
activists is that feminism now has has
become very angry and blaming men and it
but it seems that they're basically just
reversing that dynamic rather than it
it's almost like they've become a mirror
image of what they're protesting again
yes the the enemy often becomes very
much like the person they're fighting
and when we fight the enemy we often
become very much like the enemy and
that's a problem and I disagree with a
lot of you know the anger I'm just I
don't myself tend to be an angry person
and so so that part I you know I agree
with that type of critique and the rash
but to help us understand the rationale
you know Paul Elam was saying things
like you know Warren's rational logical
thoughtful approach was not
accomplishing anything the feminist
movement was generated with a huge
amount of anger toward men calling them
the oppressors calling men you know
people who were responsible for a
patriarchal society that made rules to
benefit men at the expense of women this
was a lot of anger and that my former
wife tried to get me to not be involved
with the feminist movement at the
beginning because she said it was filled
with man haters and I said I it's
important for us to find the best aspect
of feminism and to promote that and the
best aspect of feminism was expanding
options for women and making the world
much making making and allowing women to
be a lot more of themselves and they
they were in the old days of roles and
so and now I ask us to do the same thing
with with men yes there's anger what
when you're a father who's devoted to
your children and you have the that
children that you get a divorce and you
have the children ripped away from you
and you see the children being over
protected and not going doing well in
school and having ADHD and having
significant problems you get angry and
when you try to fight that and explain
to the courts and the judges and you use
a hundred and fifty thousand dollars to
fight that court battle and you lose
everything you have and you have to put
your home on mortgage and and you and
the judge is still not understanding
what what is needed for the children and
the and your your your program to have
lots of psychologists evaluate you and
expert witnesses you're paying for
lawyers you're paying for and you're
paying for your wife's lawyer as well
you get angry and so so I'd like us to
have compassion for what generates the
anger rather than rather than say
they're angry they're MRA Warren you
don't want to be associated with them no
I don't take that position but I want us
to hear the people who are angry at us
whether they be feminists or whether
they be men's issues people when I was
first interviewed by Barbara Walters for
the Today Show years ago when I was on
the board of now she said how can you
associate yourself with people like Kate
Millett she's bisexual and my response
was we have to maybe because Kate
Mallette is bisexual maybe she can see
the forest through our through the trees
she can see what we as heterosexuals
don't see because she has a broader view
of it and we have to we have to hear the
people that are different from with what
we have what we have in most of the
world today is divided perspectives that
are that they have that are take comfort
in their niche and do not hear the
people that differ from them it's
interesting to hear that Paul e Lama has
that's a very definite and deliberate
strategy on his balance yes do you think
it could work I think it works to a
certain degree it works in the same way
that feminism works that feminists used
that type of strategy well they have
many strategies going at the same time
they had the anger strategy which was
represented by the red stockings and
many of the Socialist Worker party
feminists and then they had the the now
strategy the National Organization for
women's strategy which was much more
male friendly and male inclusive and and
you know let's let's change laws and
make some constructive changes in
society so then they had the university
strategies of educating people and so
they had multiple strategies working and
one of the reasons they could get so
many strategies working in such large
numbers so quickly is because we're
biologically programmed to protect women
we are not biologically programmed to
protect men so the the big difference
between women and men is when men say we
have this problem it feels to most
people like men whining and women are
not attracted to whining men they're
attracted to alpha men and when women
hear men whining it is often like nails
on a chalkboard just that the the sound
sounds awful
when a woman complains and says she's
hurt and she has a problem we are all
we're all competing to rescue her I was
one of the competent competitors to
rescue her I was the world's biggest
male feminist da you're you have
something to say I will hear you I will
be sensitive to you
I was the biggest shock in the
sensitivity group if you will and so if
I can mock myself but it wasn't out of
trying to be the biggest shock at least
in a conscious level it was me it was
that I did hear what women were saying
my mother you know told me when I we
know Greg went to graduate school she
said I wish I had gone to college rather
than focus on making enough money to get
closed to attract a husband I really
shipped myself by not going to Cornell
where I got a scholarship and my mother
moved into depression and I saw that and
was sensitive to our depression so when
the women's move in surfaced and and and
articulated the importance of women
getting education and being able to do
what they wanted to do making full use
of their talents that was there for me
on a gut visceral level to be able to
support because you mentioned the sort
of how culture and women particularly
see men complaining there's
and whining that's really interesting
because on one level we have a narrative
that says men need to be much more in
touch with their emotional side they
need to be much more men lock things
down and that's really bad and women
often complaining about that and then on
the other side when men do saying how
they're feeling they're often described
as whining or complaining and there's
there's a little compassion for it this
is exactly accurate and this is that
this is one of the challenges that we
need to really confront is that that we
say men speak up share your feelings
it's like Lois Lane and Superman Lois
Lane wanted and begged Superman to cry
but she has zero interest in hearing
about anything from Clark Kent women do
want to hear men's feelings and hurts
and pains if they're assured first that
they're Superman that they're the
protector but when they meet Clark Kent
and he's more open about his feelings at
his pain this just turns the women off
and women don't understand this about
themselves they think that oh you know
my husband really cried when his own
when his mother was dying of cancer
I really supported that so doesn't that
mean I support a man expressing his
feelings the answer is yes and no you
ears you're supportive of a man
expressing his feelings what he's when
he has empathy for someone else's pain
you're not often support or look more
introspectively about whether you are
open to a man expressing his feelings of
anger or hurt or upset about something
that you did but when you experience it
as a criticism from your husband from
your boyfriend oftentimes your boyfriend
experiences you as backing off as being
less willing to be sexual less willing
to be emotionally open being more
distant from him after that he needs
your love he wants your love when he
expresses what hurts him and gives him
pain and he sees that you back off
he tends to repress it because everybody
else as well as you in the society has
encouraged him to back off from
expressing his weakness speaking mostly
broadly what were your feelings when he
first saw the me2 moment a
arrived and how do you think it's it's
gone and developed since I was I was
very happy women were speaking up and
then as it began and I was I was shocked
at the things that Weinstein and Matt
Lauer and you know some of the men did I
mean just to me it made you know like if
it was it was eye-opening and so I'm
very you know happy to hear about that
and and happy to sort of get the
discussion started that you know men you
know your penis is not something that
women enjoy seeing we pay billions of
dollars to take women's clothes off but
we put men and men who take their
clothes off without being given
permission first they're put in jail and
so yes that's a double standard but
let's face it you got to be aware of
this double standard you know nobody
would arrest a woman who just took you
know who took her top down a little bit
and began to expose a little bit of
nipple and we would just sort of be
salivating for more but when a man does
that with his penis you know that's the
end of the game for that man and so
you've got to know enough about the
world to know that and sorry if it's
unfair but you can't make it fair by
your power secondly understand that
there's a double standard happening out
there if a woman is if a man has spent
his entire life like Matt Weinstein you
know climbing the ladder and making the
sacrifices that he made to to sponsor
the pictures he sponsored and probably
working 70 80 hours a week so he gets
overweight and looks like a you know a
terrible example of a man the that that
he begins to see lots and lots of women
competing to have access to him lots and
lots of men competing to have access to
him and and he has certain feelings
about the women who and what he wants
oftentimes his sexuality and sex and he
feels like he has earned his way to that
and so but only by the women who are
going to compete for that and so
he has and so should he use his power in
that way absolutely not
is he a jerk absolutely yes absolutely
is he more than a jerk like an a-hole
yes he is but at the same time there's
another side to that story which is the
competition for access and the very fact
that a woman through her sexuality could
have access to a man for whom thousands
of people are competing to have access
is something that women have to look at
about who are they playing into that
many many women Marilyn Monroe used to
say this about herself I'll have sex
with anybody in order to be to move
higher into higher up the ladder of
having more of a career opportunities
and so a heterosexual male does not have
that opportunity with Matt Weinstein and
and their or any heterosexual producer
so let's look at all sides of this issue
including Matt including the the hashtag
me to decide for a long time at the
beginning of me to the part of the
narrative was and this was kind of
explicitly said quite a lot of the time
men now is not your time to speak and
now is your time to listen which and
there's some there's some truth in that
it's like there's a lot of stories that
haven't been heard before that the women
are finally feeling empowered to speak
and it's a valuable thing to do but it
seems to me that you can't stay there
because by definition it's not a
relationship if only one side of the
relationship is is allowed to speak we
have to realize that the male-female
evolutionary dance has evolved as a
tango for millions of years and it's
very important that women speak up about
what they do and don't like about their
parts of the tango and that we recognize
that there are thousands of different
women from different backgrounds who
have different answers to that question
that women don't just have one message
to deliver on that issue at the same
time all the exact opposite is also true
it is not true that we haven't listened
to women
we haven't listened to women speak the
feminist message for more than a half
century but we haven't listened to men
express their feelings ever at all that
was exactly the opposite of what
masculine
was about so let's open up and hear boys
and men's stories but what do we need to
do we need to know how to listen and so
after almost a half century of doing
work sharing helping men understand
women and women understand men and doing
role reversal dates and men's beauty
contests because I said to every man in
my audience every woman is in a beauty
contest every day of her life
if you want to understand the beauty
contest of everyday life come up here on
stage and be in the beauty contest of
everyday life that women go through and
when men went through in my audiences
those deputy contests of everyday life
they really did increase their empathy
for what it was like to be paid
attention to for your beauty and not
paid attention to for your mind
conversely when the women were asked to
risk the sexual rejection that men
experienced by but I often say there's
more than about a hundred risks of
sexual rejection that a man can
typically take between eye contact and
intercourse and I asked women just to
take a couple of those risks like asking
a guy out and kissing him on the cheek
before you know during a 20-minute
simulated date and women who were
executives just started shaking and
sweating when they had to take the risk
of asking and men out especially when I
encouraged them to ask out the man that
they were truly most attracted to which
was usually the man that won the beauty
contest and so you had eight or nine
women competing for the man that won the
beauty contest and and those women
started exaggerating what you know what
they had to offer you know I caught I
have a Porsche I'll take you out to a
really nice place at a really nice
restaurant well this woman was a student
she could didn't have a Porsche and
didn't have much money to take him out
but she started acting like what she
valued about herself I started acting
like a jerk and in my entire life she
would say the only time I ever used the
word jerk was to talk about a man now
within 20 minutes of the simulated
exercise that you asked us to do I'm
starting to be act like a jerk that's
the type of thing that we need to listen
to but I found after many years of doing
this around the country in the world
that this did help men and women have a
greater empathy toward each other but I
was still missing something
when men and women were married or in a
long-term relation
ship and they got into an argument and a
man criticized the woman or the woman
criticized the man both sexes tended to
become defensive when they were
criticized and when they became
defensive that made the other sexes
scared to speak up again about what they
that they heard so I started developing
couples communication workshops in those
couples communication workshops I taught
people how to do a workaround to our
biologically natural propensity to
become defensive when we heard personal
criticism from somebody we looked and so
that is a very hard thing to get people
to do because you're working against the
natural biological propensity to be
defensive but over a ten hour workshop
over the course of the weekend I can
train people to be able to listen in a
way that makes it self that makes it
safe for they themselves to hear the
criticism because they can see that
providing a safe environment for their
partner's criticism actually makes their
partner feel more heard and therefore
feel more loved by them and therefore
love them more so they begin to make a
different connection a connection of
being criticized to an opportunity to
deepen love that is the work that we
need to do in this world that is the
work that we need to do in this world to
help men and women hear each other help
Republicans and Democrats Israelis and
Arabs to help everyone that disagrees
with each other to hear each other first
but to become internally safe not this
is not active listening alone active
listening provides a safe environment
for the person who's speaking and
criticizing to speak up that's good but
what we also want to do is to provide a
safe internal experience for the person
being criticized to understand that as
they hear the critique of themselves
they will feel either more loved from a
loved one or more respected from a
colleague
or safer with somebody within a
different ideological perspective that
is the next evolutionary development
that we need to pioneer and how on earth
do we do that on a sort of cultural
level we do that first of all by
recognizing that it's that but by
speaking up I hope that by saying this
exactly what I just said in the boy
crisis I will begin to start forming a
cultural dialogue it's by spending time
with people like yourself who have done
good work who are not here to trick me
into saying something that they can get
a little sound bite out of and sensing
who those people are that want to move
us to the next evolutionary level
spending time with them spending time
with people who are wanting to use it
for their own purposes but maybe
beginning to soften the edges of those
people and so it's it's a lot of work
and a lot of the work is going to be
done in very small numbers at first but
sometimes that those numbers can begin
to reach tipping points where it becomes
safer and safer to speak up about these
issues because it's also very true at
the moment we talked about what can be
said and what can't be said there is a
cultural ideology at the moment that is
allowing certain types of conversations
and not allowing other types of
conversation yes and and those that
cultural ideology that allows certain
conversations and not other
conversations is an ideology that is
possessed by people who call themselves
progressive I'm I have always thought of
myself as politically liberal and
progressive I totally a pour the word
progressive being used to keep other
people shut down progressive in my
opinion only allows for people to speak
up and it never allows for some
statement like your mansplaining it
allows for a statement like you're a man
and you're explaining sharemore you're
making progress by just sharing your
feelings to begin with we've always
encouraged men to share their feelings
and then never really allowed them to
share their feelings
we're being part of the problem if we
call you
a man's plainer we're being part of the
problem if we say we do we don't want
free speech on campus for people who
don't want free speech on campuses the
fact that the Liberals are now or people
who call themselves progressive are now
trying to prevent certain people with
different ideologies from speaking on
campus is the exact opposite of
progressive it is regressive and I
refuse to be part of that part of quote
progressivism which is really a
regressive ism
so we've been putting out films about
masculinity conversations about gender
between especially between myself and
Louise Mazzanti and one of the themes
because we work we do teach men's work
as well and part of that men's work is
about emotional emotional intelligence
sort of increasing men's emotional
intelligence being honest and there's
always a hard core of kind of mgtow type
guys who post under it and say this is
feminized language you guys are closeted
feminists talking about emotions talking
about feelings and it seems it seems
like there's a there's a real online
subculture that sees any kind of talk
around men's feelings as being a
closeted kind of plot by feminists to
take over yes that is as wrong as it can
be the what McTell and other people
should every men's issues activist
should be encouraging ourselves to be
able to act to encourage boys and men to
access their feelings it is when when
boys get depressed and they get ready to
commit suicide it is almost always
because they have not had access to
their feelings because they have not
gotten had been gathered together in
groups with other boys who are then
sharing what's going on behind their
masks and be every boy every girl or two
has a mask and and when boys when girls
have masks they oftentimes talk with
other girls and they discover that the
mask is one thing and the girl is
another thing
and they and they can talk with their
mothers about that well the boys have
masks they fear that they're the only
one that they're lonely that they're the
that that they are they have ADHD and
they can't get it together to really do
their homework well or they wanted to
join the basketball team but they can't
rehearse effectively and and so on and
so they feel like there's something
fundamentally wrong with them and then
they get together in groups of eight or
nine other boys and the other boys six
or seven of them was saying yes I have
the same feeling and others are saying I
don't have that feeling but you know
I've been taking drugs or I've been
cutting myself or I've been you know
I've been masturbating and I feel
terrible about that because my parents
are Catholic at me and they feel that
that's a really terrible thing to do and
somebody else is saying well gee I don't
I don't have that response from the
Catholic parents but I have it this way
and when boys are sharing that they
their the the the Albatross
psychological albatross that has lifted
off their backs is enormous and so it is
just a fundamental mistake to be to to
to not encourage boys to open up and
express their feelings their hurts in
their pains but there is also I think I
understand some of the point because if
you share that within a narrative of men
are faulty men are emotionally shut down
and there's not respect for men's
vulnerability or it can be used against
them in this culture that it can be a it
can be a sort of subtle power play
you're encouraged you're encouraged to
be vulnerable but a vulnerability isn't
necessarily respected correct and that's
the same type of thing that women
experience in the opposite mode fifty
years ago if they wanted to be a surgeon
people would say well why don't you just
you know get married and you know and
maybe be a teacher if you really so
bright and so we discourage girls from
being their whole cells because we
wanted them to conform to being feminine
that's a that's dangerous just like
encouraging boys to try to not share
your feelings because you don't want
that to be used against you we need to
be encouraging boys to be whole people
and yes it will be used against you
and yes find the women and men in your
society that it could be that want the
real you not a fake you I don't want to
be married to somebody that makes me
keep my mask on or doesn't make me keep
my mask on but I choose to keep my mask
on in order to get her approval in love
that is not approval that is that's
approval but it's not love and so we
want boys to be loved boys have been
trained to be invulnerable in order to
be disposable and we've been trained to
take the concussions on the way to the
touchdown and to be cheered with not
just by girls and the cheerleaders but
also by the fathers who say that's my
son that got that touchdown who do what
I call son dropping dropping the names
of their son to say I'm the parent that
raised that boy that got the touchdown
without any consciousness of the boys
the other brother that is standing next
to the father watching his brother score
that touchdown is being ignored because
he wasn't willing to risk his life and
get a concussion to score a touchdown we
need to this is this is the next growth
work of men and as as I mentioned before
it is not just an initiation process
initiation processes are excellent but
and an initiation processes help boys to
move from you are being cared for by a
parent to now is your time to be to be
the one that's accountable the one
that's responsible the one that's the
one that has to do more than just be
served you're the one that also serves
that's the positive function of an
initiation process but that initiation
process cannot exist effectively when
it's independent of an entire lifetime
of being brought up to serve and be
responsible and be accountable as well
as to be to be served at times and to
have your own feelings be able to be
heard
I watched the red pill film and thought
it was really interesting it was it's
it's subtitle of feminist goes inside
the men's rights activist movement and
as you see in the film she changes her
her mind about some of the things that
she is but I also had a kind of
suspicion that it's a very good
narrative and as a documentary maker I
kind of thought
how much of that was actually authentic
did she really was she really a a
feminist or is it it's quite convenient
that she changed their mind but you what
was your experience of her when when you
met her and did you see that journey
yourself I have had the advantage of
seeing Cassie from feminist days and
feminist initial interviews where she
would use words like patriarchy and
dominate and stuff like that that all
revealed since they came out of her so
naturally combined with the fact that
her last two films were very liberal
this all revealed an honesty about her
being a genuine liberal and a genuine
feminist and so and I could see her you
know listen with the pretense of an open
mind but then we and then I saw the the
challenges that she went through we
happen to live near each other so when
she and she shared with me and I shared
in the film I believe to the fact that
the first time she when she listened to
us she pretended to listen and absorb
and not be filled with objections but
her mind was coming up with feminist
answers to our questions and the
discounting of what we were saying and
it was only when she went over the
transcripts of every single interview
she did of 40 people that she realized
that we were not saying what she was
having her mind say that we were saying
that we were saying things that were
very different and that there was almost
nothing that she could disagree with and
so she began to play our message by her
feminist friends thinking my goodness I
really heard something different and
this is really an important part of what
needs to be a doddle dialogue not a
monologue and and she did that and then
she started getting scared because
almost all of her feminist friends were
just completely unwilling to hear any of
it and this shocked her because she
assumed as a feminist that our friends
were open-minded and this is exactly the
same process I went through and
see he came to me and said I'm a fear
afraid is it true that said that these
women are not listening that are they
gonna unbecoming are they good am I
going to lose my financing am I gonna
lose my reputation I'm gonna be the
devil like you are and and I said yes
and she went whoa that was not the I
expected assurance not that answer and I
said but he will also be known for your
integrity you'll also be free to do and
say and and do films in the future that
are your that come from where you what
you discover not what other people who
financed you want you to discover and
you'll become a free agent and that's
what happened for me I became free to
say what I to do the research on the boy
crisis that led me to understand that
boys do so much work worse when they
don't have a significant amount of
father involvement and just to say that
and then to document 70 different ways
that that was true and and not be
fearful that I shouldn't say this but I
can say this and how could I say that
and how can I twist it and turn it to be
a good boy to mommy and it was like I
was freed to be my own agent and that's
what Cassie has freed herself to do by
moving to the next level and I said yeah
you have to make the decision you'll
either be you know you'll be well
financed and comfortable or you will be
go through some shit Theo's challenges
but you will also create new allies and
people who have deep respect for what
you're doing and I think when it comes
to gender issues the red pill is by far
the most courageous documentary that has
ever been created even the name the red
pill has been associated with a lot of
misogyny and online kind of anti women
sentiment do you think that's fair or
not there is some you know in some of
the reddit places and other places there
is speaking out against women that has
gone way beyond what I'm comfortable
with
and I also as somebody who listens to
people couples all the time exaggerate
what is the challenge that they find in
their partner when people exaggerate and
overdo their exaggeration
they usually have not been heard and
once they've been heard that
exaggeration diminishes you know and one
of the one of the mindsets that I ask
couples to do in a workshop is to
imagine a stream and the anger that your
partner has is like pollution in that
stream and what we have when people
don't get listened to whether it's Men's
Rights people or red pill people is we
have a huge amount of anger and the
solution is being the filter that allows
them to share what their hurt and their
pain is and then watch and be it
anticipate a much greater purity and
beauty and wonderful water on the other
side of that a filter of your attitudes
really changed and in respect to
feminism
well my attitudes have not changed in
respect to gender roles I don't consider
myself a feminist and I don't consider
myself a men's liberationist or a men's
rights movement person I consider myself
an advocate of gender liberation and I
want both sexes to be liberated from
rigid roles of the past and to be open
to more flexible roles for the future
and so my my desire is I do support the
expansion of men's and boys
consciousness and expansion of our
concern for what's happening for Ben's
and men and boys because I feel that
like for the last half-century we've
been putting our binoculars on women's
experience we've put our binoculars on
women's experience of powerlessness and
women's experience of men's power we
haven't had our binoculars at all on
men's experience of powerlessness and
men's experience of female power when a
fourteen-year-old boy considers begins
to feel his testosterone and his desire
for sexuality and he sees a cheerleader
in his junior high school class cheering
and he begins to have feelings and
desires for her he knows that she is
most likely to be attracted to the
football team members and not him
and so he fears that if he doesn't get
on that football team the chances of him
having any type of connection with her
is minimal and so he feels enormous ly
powerless toward every female to whom
he's attracted if he's a heterosexual
boy and and so that is an example of the
female experience of the male experience
of powerlessness visa vie girls and
women but it's only one of many examples
and so the and so there's been no
credence given to that experience of
powerlessness and we fundamentally
misunderstood the whole idea of male
privilege and male power it one of the
experiences that I do in my in my
workshops is to ask everybody in my
audience to think about what they're
what created the glint in their father's
eye
and so I put everyone through a sort of
guided imagery of thinking about did
your father have a glint in his eye when
he was writing poetry when he was an
artist when he was fishing when he
played golf and when he was let's say a
when if you're a little bit older maybe
when he was playing with your children
and you noticed that he was playing with
your children
he had a type of freedom that was not
encumbered by his need to tell you what
to do
or to criticize you you know and so
everybody eventually comes up with a
glint in their dad's eye or if they
don't didn't know their dad their
imagination of what created the glint of
their dad's eye and so after I do that
experience I then ask them to imagine
consider what created the glint in your
dad's eye versus what your dad actually
did for a living and which one of those
two things would have been likely to
make more money would he have been
likely to make more money writing poetry
or singing or in a choir in the church
or you know doing something like that or
did it was he more likely to make more
the consistent consistent dependable
money as an accountant as an engineer or
whatever he did and so that's and most
people you know come up with the the the
belief and understanding that their
father gave up the glint in his eye to
do what he felt he had to do to earn the
type of money that the family needed to
support itself so dad's gave up the
glint in their eye to create a new glint
in their eye and the new glint was you
as a child being successful you as a
child having more opportunities
privileges and an options that he had so
let's look at that the father played his
role which was to sacrifice the glint in
his eye to be able to help you have more
of a better life to be able to be on the
protest line and the feminist movement
let's say and so and now you're calling
that male privilege and male power as if
it was a part of the role of an
oppressor in fact that was the
discrimination against your dad was the
discrimination that said it's your role
because you're a male to earn more money
so your dad went out and did things that
were less of less fulfilling he drove a
cab he drove an uber he drove he did he
worked in a coal mine he worked as a
firefighter as a police officer he went
into the military so he could have
stable dependable income so you could
have more options and now you're turning
that against him and saying that he had
male privilege and he had male power you
have no compassion understanding of the
male role and what was the expectation
on him and you know if we said to the
two mothers you are the oppressors
because you was stayed at home and took
care of the children and had all that
love a connection and the man had to go
out and work in the coal mine you
oppressed him and made him do that we
would have no understanding of of the
fact that the mother was pressured into
raising children and the dad was
pressured into raising money those were
two roles that we that we
depended upon for survival let's be
compassionate to the the let's let's get
on our knees and thank our mothers and
fathers for the sacrifices that they
made to be able to free us to think
beyond just making sacrifices and so
that's where the feminist movement
should be that what the feminist
movement movement has evolved into is a
dichotomous movement dichotomous
movement in which it says there are
oppressors and oppressed that type of
thinking grew out of Marxist feminism in
which there was these statement that the
people who were the the upper the
bourgeoisie they're there they are the
oppressors and they and they and then
there's the oppressed and before that
the civil rights movement where there
truly was the oppressors and the
oppressed and and so from that oppressor
oppressed model the feminist movement
developed which was a completely in a
very appropriate model for civil rights
and a very inaccurate model for men and
women in which we were all in the same
family boat which our mothers and
fathers were both making sacrifices in
the hopes that our lives would be better
than their lives were and we have
completely missed the male contribution
to our fathers and grandfathers helping
to make our lives so privileged that we
can sit here and talk about these things
in ways our fathers and grandfathers
were never privileged to do this is very
interesting because I speak to some
there's this concept of the patriarchy
yes and I speak to some women who who
have a much more nuanced understanding
on one side you have a sort of almost
conspiracy theory type idea of the
patriarchy it's men oppressing women
throughout history hoarding all of the
money and the power but you I do speak
to a lot of other women and have a much
more nuanced understanding of it and
saying well no the patriarchy is a
system that forces both men and women
into roles that they don't they they
don't that don't fulfill them and that
don't speak to their deepest needs it
sounds like you're you're coming from
that same perspective if you want to
define it that way I'm disagreeing with
both perspectives okay I'll take one at
a time
so let's go in
almost every Gender Studies course the
number one one of gender studies 101
advocates that we've lived in a world
dominated by a patriarchy in which men
made the rules to benefit men at the
expense of women there's virtually no
gender studies teacher at a major
university that would disagree with that
and I say that's completely inaccurate
what is that more accurate from my
perspective is that we've lived in a
world that's dominated by the need to
survive and and in that attempt to
survive most cultures developed roles
that were different for a minute for
women women risk their lives in
childbirth and and made sacrifices to
raise their children effectively men
risk their lives raising money and risk
their lives in war to protect the
children that the women bore and so both
sexes made different types of sacrifices
and so because that was what was
necessary for survival and so that the
dominating force was not patriarchy but
survival I disagree with the second
premise because it is because it is not
appropriate I don't believe to call it a
patriarchy that forced both sexes into
roles that would be as as mistaken as
calling it matriarchy that forced both
sexes into roles in fact in most nations
mothers care more that their children
get married and that's stayin to strict
roles that there's that there's their
women in many respects and in many
cultures are more conservative more
attached to roles than the men are and
so but it really doesn't make any
difference which which cultures have
which percentage of men and women that
are attached to roles what is true is
that using the word patriarchy to say
that that patriarchy hurt both sexes is
as misleading as using the word
matriarchy because it sort of tends to
blame men as or it would blame women if
we said a matriarch a force both sexes
into both roles and so I'd like to say
rather than using the word patriarchy or
matriarchy
it was survival needs and does it the
desire to survive that led most cultures
to figure out what roles men and women
could play to help the next generation
to survive and thrive to a greater
degree so we're leading men's work and I
found it really really since I started
sort of going to a men's group a few
years ago I found it a really positive
thing oh really
it's really helped and we talked about
vitamin M that in some sense we're all
as men craving that that contact with
other men a real honest communication
that real Brotherhood do you do you
think it's really important that that
men have that kind of level of support
and connection with other men yeah
absolutely it's a the moment that men
get together and talk and share what's
going on in their lives is they do
something revolutionary which is when
they're talking about their real
feelings and their real experiences of
life they are they are taking themselves
out of an isolation pit which is what
every man was trained to be experiencing
and they they open up and they're
they're freer to see themselves in
relation to their peers they realize
that friendships are not based on
keeping themselves to themselves
and drinking instead and taking drugs
instead you know men you know die from
drugs and from alcohol and from car act
you know reckless driving far more than
women do we commit suicide far more than
women do
and when one looks in the boy crisis
book at the at the 60-plus the red flags
of depression
you realize clearly that men Express to
experience depression more than women do
but we just never measured it in a male
friendly way and so the psychological
problems are much more the province and
mental health problems are much more the
problems of men and masculinity men were
never designed to be healthy we were
designed to be heroes héroes is
preparation for a short life health
intelligence is preparation for a long
life
that's the future of masculinity if it
is not to be self harm as masculinity
but it is to be emotionally intelligent
and women are not going to want women in
the future will not women in the future
who are earning income will not want men
who are just earning income they will
want men who have emotional intelligence
as well as success intelligence and so
we have to if we want to be loved by
women we have to develop the type of
emotional intelligence that women will
seek when they are successful
economically I guess
implicit in what you're saying is that
men are encouraged to wear masks and to
perform and to to be okay to be strong
and what you get from a men's group is
that you're you all you can all take off
the mask together and the irony is that
I find that women really want men who
are authentic they don't really want men
who are performing and they can kind of
they want men who are who have strong
bonds with other men and they want men
who are in touch with themselves
yes I know many women are alike which i
think about I just said it I'm gonna go
Superman and Lois Lane yes right okay
let me start that again yes and no it
depends on the woman many women are like
Lois Lane they have no interest in Clark
Kent but they have a lot of interest in
Superman and once they find their
Superman and they feel protected and
they feel secure they want a man who can
express feelings but that's within the
framework of feeling secure by a man's
protection first the problem is that the
qualities it takes to succeed at work
and the qualities it takes to succeed in
performing are in tension with their
almost inversely related to the
qualities it takes to succeed in love so
for example when you're when you're in
the military and you are afraid of
losing your life in battle you have to
disconnect from your feelings in order
to do what you have to do and so you
cannot say gee I really value myself
and the fact that I'm Jewish and I'm
being called you know all sorts of
negative anti-semitic names I should
just seal that off and not say anything
about it because you know I have to take
it you know military people and men in
general were trained to do what they had
to perform well not just in the military
where it's really clear but also of the
Japanese have a word called Karoshi it
is means death at the desk or death from
overwork as an executive and Karoshi is
is an understanding by the Japanese
society that the men who are expected to
perform in an economic type of way as an
executive that the feminists say are
that may have male privilege of male
power but in fact it doesn't have they
don't have male privilege of male power
they have a male expectation to be
willing to die says supply money to
their family and so that a woman will
marry them because he's a salary man who
earns a lot of money and he then learns
to value himself only because he earns a
lot of money the corrosion of the
Japanese have moved so far beyond that
that one of the most popular games in
Japan is a game called Karoshi and the
people who win at the game of Karoshi
they climb up the ladder before somebody
else climbed up the economic ladder to
get to the wall that they never maybe
even wanted to so you get higher on and
the winner of the game Karoshi offs
himself that is commits suicide not in
real life but in the game so the
uncommon wisdom of many japanese youth
is that the process that we've taught
men to earn money to make more power or
have more status is is actually a form
of encouraging men to commit suicide and
the and so therefore many boys who are
growing up are saying if I don't want to
follow my father's footsteps of climbing
this ladder that with no choice about
what I'm doing and I don't want to join
the military and possibly die so what do
I do how do I have purpose where do i
channel it and that's where an entirely
different dialogue
needs to happen and women need to be
part of the dialogue about healthy
masculinity because a lot of us males
are heterosexuals a lot of us males want
women's love and women have the power
that has not been acknowledged at all in
this culture if women said I will only
fall in love with I will only marry I
will only have sex with men who walk on
their hands we would be having hand
walking contest starting tomorrow and
after a month or two we would be
competing to make sure that we can walk
on one hand because Lea walking on two
hands is common so I can walk on one
hand seatmate and so as long as we have
that type of need for female approval we
need to recognize that being ourselves
is not just functional for ourselves
it's also functional for heterosexual
love and women have to look at
themselves and say do I really I want a
yearning for a man who's authentic but
if I'm falling in love with in the
framework of men who are performers I'm
going to be encouraging the men to
perform and not be authentic and that's
a responsibility I have to take and make
sure I don't just fall in love within
the framework of performers I'll give
one very powerful story I think on that
issue and this is a challenge for this
is a challenge for almost every woman
and a including very powerful and secure
women as a rule like Gloria Steinem I
remember going to a show that Alan Alda
was going to be hosting in New York City
eight years ago and with Gloria and we
cab driver picked us up this is before
over and a few decades before over and
and the and Gloria was saying to me
while we were waiting for the cab become
you know how hard it is to find really
good men and that men that are thinking
that are thoughtful that are you know
that are sensitive and so on we get into
the cab and the cab driver recognizes
Gloria especially after she says where
we're going to a TV show
and and and he starts and so Gloria's
very it's a very gracious woman and says
you know well what are you and you know
involved with and he goes well you know
I driving a cab now but I have a
master's degree in anthropology and she
says oh really and so he we had a
wonderful discussion about different
cultures and so on and the guy was very
thoughtful and insightful and and you
know and then Gloria Gloria and I get
out of the cab and I said I said well
there's a good man meaning just the
opposite of what she had said about
those men not being available and and
then I looked at her I said do you see
him as a possible candidate for your
love and she's sort of like gulped and
registered the point but the
conversation ended there and what I am
saying about that is that when a man is
driving a cab or doesn't have the
success that we want him to have in
performance mode we often are as
invisible to his better qualities as men
are to a less attractive woman's better
qualities born you've been leading men's
groups since the 1970s what do men get
from men's groups and how important is
to is it for men to have those kind of
relationships men get themselves from
men's groups they learn in men's groups
how to be human beings not just human
doings they learn how the process of
becoming a human doing often forces them
to wear a mask that that shadows
themselves as human beings even to
themselves and to their children they
learn that at the end of life almost no
man says I wish I'd spent more time at
the office I wish I spent more time in
the battleground but says I wish I'd
spent more time with my family I wish I
was there for that recital I wish I was
there to just have a family dinner
nights more often where I could talk
through with my son and my daughter
what's going on in their life where I
could really listen to them
draw them out and give them maybe a
little bit of pusher shove in a
different area that's out of their
comfort zone I wish I could take them
camping more often I wish I could
roughhouse with them more often I wish I
could read stories to them at bedtime
more often these are the things that men
yearn for we work so hard because we
want our families loved but then when we
dip them when we oftentimes feel
criticized and complained about and and
disconnected from our families love we
feel or we work very hard to become a
great lawyer and we learn as a result of
becoming a great lawyer that we are
really good at listening for a criticism
that we can give our oppose opposing
lawyer and then when we listen to the
criticism we can give our wives that the
process that worked to make us a great
lawyer made it us a terrible husband and
a terrible father and so these are the
types of things we discover by talking
about our common experiences in a men's
group because a lot of people listening
to that would say well why can't men get
that from a conversation with their
wives a conversation and intimate
relationship one of the reasons why it's
hard for men to get that in the
conversation with their wife is because
they're they feel whether it's accurate
or not they feel that their wife married
them in part because they were
successful in part because they when the
going got tough they would stand up and
get going but they didn't that their
wife did not marry them because they
felt like they want instead of becoming
a medical doctor they said gee I don't
want to become a medical doctor you know
what I'd like to be I'd like to be an
artist I may not be the best artists in
the world but I'd like to at least try
my creativity and develop that and by
the way that's gonna take maybe five
years of art school and maybe thirty
years or twenty years of trying to sell
my art but and most most women who
married the doctor the lawyer or the
executive they're not interested in that
real feeling of what the boy or the boy
becoming a man really wants to do that's
what the men feel and if women really do
feel that way about a man they need to
make sure that they share
responsibilities that they share
sponsibility for asking the man out that
they share responsibility for calling
him up that when they go to dinner that
they don't expect that he'll pay more
than half the bill or pay the bill more
than half the time that these are the
little signs that men pick up about are
you interested in me for who I am or do
I have to pay the bill to be worthy of
your company and if he has to pay a bill
to be worthy of your company that means
he's learning the lesson that to be
worthy of your company he has to be
successful therefore he has to wear the
mask of success and therefore you're not
interested in him taking off that mask
and saying I don't want to pay for
dinners more than half the time I don't
want to pick you up I don't I don't want
to buy your drinks any more than you buy
my drinks I don't want to buy you a
diamond when you don't buy me a diamond
I want to really be as a partner
together and I want to I want to be able
to be free to earn less money and to
perform less so I can be more fulfilled
doing what I really want to do I want to
be able to when the children are born to
say who will take care of the children
full-time part-time not assume that
you'll have the choice and I'll have to
go along with whatever your choice is
these are all the things that are not
being discussed in society at this
moment that must be discussed that can
come out in men's groups that men can
realize that they're not alone and
they're thinking about these things and
then be able to articulate them to both
their wives but before we articulated
these things to our wives we have to
articulate these things to ourselves and
there's no safer space to do that in a
men's group because there's no fear of
being judged by a woman in a men's group
let me say one more thing about that and
this is because not because we don't
want women it is because we want women
so much that we have become over
dependent upon women's approval and that
ironically unmake sus the man that the
woman wants
it is not quite a catch-22 I think it's
a type of insight that is a type of new
male wisdom which is why I called the
game Karoshi that the Japanese play boys
uncommon wisdom and we have to learn
just like a woman had to learn in the
60s that becoming the type of woman that
a man wanted her to be having a certain
waist and a certain size and looking a
certain way and putting makeup on over
herself that that the makeup was was
making up the gap between the power she
had and the power she wanted to have and
that was putting on a false face well
men have makeup to male makeup is I am
dr. Warren Farrell best-selling author
of the boy crisis and what's my makeup
I'm doctor best-selling author
that's all makeup it's me being afraid
of saying I'm also Warren Farrell
vulnerable human being in these five or
six ways and this is I guess the the
paradox that's quite difficult to
understand from the outside but I know
it to be true in the men's work that
we're doing that the work that I'm doing
with other men is about being grounded
in myself to then meet women from a much
more empowered place yes like that's
that's a cart that I guess is a catch-22
that by going more deeply into our my
own masculinity I can then meet women
much more grounded because I don't need
anything from them I'm not in fear of
them I've resourced myself elsewhere
that's a paradox I guess it's a paradox
but it's also we have to respect women
enough to know that so when I was dating
I was single for 21 years before between
my first and my second marriage to the
woman I've been involved with for the
last 24 years and the HOS now my wife
and and during that period of dating I
often I made it very clear to women that
I would not be picking up the check
no and I never asked a woman out I
discussed whether we had enough interest
in each other to pursue something
further and then I asked her if she said
yes as I said well you know
where do we want to go from here with
this and the woman we usually say well
let's go out together and so I'd help
incorporate her as a partner in the
decision to continue our relationship at
dinner together and then I would say and
I had the advantage of her knowing what
I did but there were some women that one
a woman was a president of a local now I
will not reveal who or where and she was
out with me and when it came to dinner
and the end she expected that I would
pick up the check even though she was a
now president and and I said explain to
her that I didn't believe in picking up
the check I believed in sharing or I
fight about picking up the check this
time and that I liked Terra that we
could pick up the she could pick up the
next check and or she could cook a meal
for me and so and she started to cry and
and then she got so embarrassed at
herself and to her credit she said I am
so embarrassed Here I am the president
of a now chapter and I am upset because
I feel like I really like you and if you
don't pick up the check there's a part
of me that believes that if a man
doesn't pick up the check it's because
he doesn't like me or respect me and I'm
afraid of that and so I had enormous
respect for her for crying and revealing
on what she said but what I found and
this is where I'm going with this what I
found is that when I shared why I didn't
want to pick up the check more than half
the time why I didn't want to put myself
in a position where I could not make
enough money to be able to share say
what I needed to say in the world
because I was paying out a lot of money
toward supporting women then I would
that women looked at me and they said
they saw on the one hand like gee most
men who wouldn't pay more than at least
half or more wouldn't pay for dinner for
me they must not like me or there must
be cheapskates I saw a different
experience for most women but not all
women which was he has enough courage to
say what almost no other man has enough
courage to say and said they saw the
strength behind that most women did
but other women some of whom I was very
attracted to and some of whom I would
felt I would be able to be sexual with
that evening if we had completed this
dinner process I had to get up all the
courage I could to realize that I was
probably going to forfeit being
emotionally and sexually involved that
evening if I said something like that
and so it is and so first of all we need
to submit in the long run I found a
woman who was responsive to that
who was there up to who I was very
attractive to attracted to and yet she
did respond to that to the courage and
didn't have a need to be paid for all
the time
even though she had never been paid she
had never had to pay a single penny on
any date in her entire life up until
that point she was able to reverse her
paradigm because I was strong enough in
my apéro dime and so I'm asking men via
the support of members Roop's to be able
to be strong enough in their paradigm
shift to be able to share that with
women with compassion and to be able to
hear the woman that maybe can't hear you
first time around and to explain with
love as you're listening also to her
what you what you feel and you what you
believe in or on fire thank you very
much it's been a pleasure the second
part of this interview was Warren
Farrell is available exclusively for
patrons through our patreon site we used
to have a battle of the sexes
that's been historical but now we no
longer have a battle of the sexes we
have a war in which only one side has
shown up and to turn these words into
action
rebel wisdom is running our own
workshops for men and women in the UK
check our events page for details
[Music]
you