[Music]
the phallic has to return mm-hmm and I
think what's required here joining us it
has to return well he has to return yeah
it's a lot of chaos out there right now
a lot of chaos because Jordan Peterson
disappeared and this whole new this
whole new movement of politics and
spirituality and it sort of started in
America and England is completely it's
it's it's Anna mess right now
you know if it wasn't for Eric Wedge
down in a few guys out that would keep
sort of trying to keep it together it
would be total mess at the moment but
anyway the found it has to return and I
think this is what I might disagree with
Peter Thiel in Jordan Peterson hostage
great helps for a Christian revival I
think that's done I think they live too
much in North America and they don't see
what's happening in South America and
Europe and other places they certainly
haven't foreseen the huge disaster
that's awaits the Catholic Church when
it's exposed to haven't done pedophilia
for two thousand years probably the
biggest scandal ever and still to blow
up right so I think Chris challenge is
done and I think Islam is done and I
think what we're seeing today with the
fundamentalism and the scream for
returning to Christianity Islam is just
it that's the end of it that's it as a
supernova or the you know the the what
do you call it
yeah yeah the end the end of history for
these two religious certain you know at
the end of history for it mankind
because if we go back further down if
you go deeper down to the origins of
Abrahamic religion and understand the
difference in Egypt and Persia and
reinterpret China and America today
that's the same difference between each
of the person and realize that if you
split the phallus and have it try to
power rather than a dictatorship you're
so much better off with absolutely
everything else in that society
especially comes to creating proper
civilization rather than just mimicking
your neighbor mm-hmm yeah I think the
difference between you and these guys is
that you're look you're looking at this
from a world perspective yes it's it's
just interesting because everybody else
is looking at it in terms of the history
of the West
and which is you can't do that I mean
when I started doing philosophy 40 years
ago I knew that I'd be pathetic if I
didn't break with the Greeks
you have to stop citing and reciting the
Greeks all the time if the Greeks did
not start philosophy its way way older
and to understand what the Greeks went
right and what the Greeks went wrong
yeah I've tried to stop persia and
babylon you have to understand ancient
egypt and you also have to understand
the East which is way older and has done
these mistakes of the past and also
survived them and the reason why
eventually you end up with these sort of
pluralistic societies China and India
fundamentally are I mean in when it
comes to rigidly different they are you
you you have different religions that
are different roles mm-hmm okay
in Japan chin twosome is the religion of
the military and the priesthood legend
right and Buddhism is the religion of
the monks and nuns and your own
spiritual practices and it's a magical
religion hmm perfect combo makes sense
made sense to Japanese been sent to the
Koreans until they became American
Pentecostal Christians for God knows why
but anyway and then you come to China
you had Buddhism and Taoism with some of
the rose problem was they left the state
to the Confucians they should now but
that's where China has a problem is
similar to Europe in the Middle East
when it comes to India that's not the
problem the problem with India rather
was that India happened to be weak at a
time when he was invaded by the
Europeans it was invaded by the Irish
before that it's also a heart it's a
country it's easy to create agricultural
abundance but it's very hard to maintain
military force mm-hmm and the way
India's reacted eyes by being more
magical I call it an Aikido culture like
Aikido like you don't attack anybody let
them attack you and then you absorb them
mm-hmm India is like an alien monster
he's like another kind of it they kind
of exploded the violence at the same
time they're very I think any cartridge
on exploding to violence now and then
but proudly Indian less so than other
cultures have but I I think we're moving
towards eventually a world where
everything's becoming more like India
and I think that's what we should look
to India for culture inspiration and I
think India's mother agree better as a
model India is also plural fundamentally
plural you can't even control in there
from Delhi
and these things are great because for
the future mean even the European Union
it's not really working and the reason
isn't working is because we don't have a
daily morning newspaper in Europe that
everybody reads India does in India had
person before that is a court language
and it replaced Persian with English in
the 19th century so it has a shared
language that they imported because it's
important it's not native everybody can
speak it so it's a great idea to the
court language that you share then
hopefully English can become the court
language in Europe and that way you can
look to India for inspiration rather
than US and Europe and India can do fine
they can be pretty peaceful and
hopefully they can get the economic
growth going to get civilization growing
again but but I think so now it's about
American China and I'm very very
skeptical about the dictatorship of
China and I hope they failed miserably
with a dictatorship model so the China
could open up and go for a much more
cool model eventually yeah China was a
bunch of kingdoms at one point right it
was kind of like Europe it was like
Europe at one point you know during the
Han Dynasty before that China's just lit
up and split up again and again
you know it's it's kind of carnal China
one historian told me that it's a nun
governor bull right because it's too big
it should be like Europe it should be
just a bunch of yeah the Han Chinese I
think I did is a myth because actually
there's enormous difference between
different parts of China and China else
is occupied of course half Mongolia it's
occupied East Turkestan it's occupied
Tibet and they got problems to sort of
with that they're probably just gonna
populate those places like like the
United States did and keep them but in
any case where we're gonna ride
eventually is that we have to rather
this China that goes more plural that is
not mmm
definitely otherwise for in a really
dangerous place because you and I talked
about this in soccer scene before he
talked about that we got a head for a
society with sensors everywhere cameras
microphones everywhere data collection
everywhere
our own senses our own human bodies
being connected these sensors in every
possible way some software's also
probably gonna be the only gonna sell
saw the existential crisis not aware the
atomic bombs and how do we solve the
climate problem you know all those
things are gonna be down since ah cracy
it's very it's a necessary road forward
to route some chakra see we got to
figure out a model where so Socrates
plural no Manik right so not like the
Chinese model but the Indian model of
sense ah cracy yes mm-hmm or possibly
the American one right so that's where
hopes at hmm good so I I think we're
getting close to understanding prizes an
event now in a fundamental way and and
understand the difference in numerology
and EV ontology and we can align the two
we can understand why women tend to go
to a circular and then tend to go
towards the linear and there's nothing
wrong with that at all it's a if it's in
phallus and matrix and and it's
fundamental to human imagination and he
should be fundamental to human story hmm
yeah and well we see it a lot of men
going towards the circular right these
days in yeah
the colored the cultures that were being
kind of critical about and well as well
as it almost impossible to say to people
they just they don't get it no no no it
is there is a point here too that men in
our society they are going towards 100%
psychiatric diagnosis Jordan Peters are
more than anybody right so if every man
is psychiatrically sick because he's a
man maybe men are looking for manhood in
the wrong place hmm this is what happens
to the male mind when the male model
gets entangled with the circular yeah I
think it becomes it endlessly
psychological or something right it
doesn't but the linear is about purpose
he said that I've got a purpose I've got
somewhere I need to go and gives me
direction in my life and I got brothers
that I'm gonna do it would
so we're gonna walk off you're gonna
walk off at that direction and we're
gonna come back and deliver abundance
mm-hmm now if men are not allowed to do
that if they live in a society where
they can't do that interval where they
totally use us they will eventually kill
themselves for alcohol and other forms
of abuse and and they will take pills
and they'd be lousy in bed and women are
gonna regret it immensely yes why would
we kill men like that men without a
sense of direction it's a terrible
predicament yeah this is what Jordan
Peterson actually meant and if you go
deeper than what he talked about and
understand not just like to get up in
the bed in the morning pretend you got a
purpose because then we end up in the
world of potentials the men are living
in today oh look I mean actual purpose
we need a yes yeah it's a great guidance
yeah the guys who work with here you and
I in Europe and the European men's
movement they coming back to us now
after a few years I said yeah I got my
shit together and made the bed in the
morning and I go to the gym and I work
out so I get laid but there's something
here about going to the gym when reality
should be I go boy or so later chopping
wood or you should be out actually
nature hunting should be out doing
things that are real it's a bit like
it's a bit like jerking off to
pornography instead of having real sex
life yeah yeah that's the problem with
the gyms that the problem there was
theatrical thing that's a problem with
sports that's certainly the probably
computer games games play into these
mechanisms but but exactly what a
baudrillard called it he called it I
can't remember the world the this
virtual spectacle know what you know
that's the board yeah but you are called
that the you know like to everybody's
living in the matrix or something it's
like your training our shell arts and
the matrix but you're not the world that
we live in its spectacle but live in a
theater we don't live in a real world
right so at least there's combinator
there's a great major return to nature
among young men hunting clubs are
oversubscribed they even go shooting
guns to learn how to simulacrum that's
the word I'm looking for in the
background Similac living in the
simulacra the simulacrum would
Berger called it and the ultimate
simulacrum is of course the computer
game mm-hmm all right so if you play
video games instead of going out in
nature you lose it you lose it because
it is an eerie sense that this is not
real it's playing into my mind and it's
it's it's kick-starting these functions
inside of me that are my masculinity but
because I then just see it as a game and
I do shootouts and I killed tons of
people in here and it's not a real war
then it just becomes absolutely
meaningless and it numbs you down hmm
and this number means you will go into a
depression and bipolar T so we see
increasing that 2020 you're gonna see
the young men are going towards 100%
bipolarity diagnosis yeah especially
long straight young men at least so if
we don't see this as a massive problem
where are we Jack Stein said there was a
plague of and in that sense the
psychiatric yes what a plague he called
it a plank he said it's not serious and
I think we say that in any kind of
tongue-in-cheek way he really meant it
it's like it's a it's a plague lovely
conversation by the way between you and
sack highly recommended listening but
anyway Sakura Stein and I'm sure Jordan
Peters has got a weathers and me are on
a warpath here together we're not on the
warpath against psychiatry when it's
when it's when it's deserved but he's
rarely is today's psychiatrist become an
industry dictated by Big Pharma and it's
all about creating as many pills as
possible and put them in as many bodies
as possible to the largest possible
profit and there is no no function
whatsoever to stop Pharma from going
towards a hundred percent psychiatric
diagnosis in our society and then we're
fucked and this is gonna start with
young men and we need to get these guys
off the pills we need them to understand
the bipolarity is a natural reaction
against the sick society this is where
sacra Stein and I probably agree so to
me this means a return to a relationship
between the body and the mind and in the
ohm both the outside world that is
natural and works and functions that
means I'm not gonna go vegan I'm not
gonna go pass
I actually believe that sex and violence
has to introduce some way into people's
lives I also believe in a strong return
to art the artist died or the last 30 or
40 yep dad I keep saying that I keep
saying that it's like I keep saying
where's the earth like where's like
artistic movements which are you know
because our moments are more powerful
than political movie yeah it's what I'm
lacking in John for variks talks he
talks about a return to authenticity but
he doesn't talk about the phallic mean
he's not even touching the area of art
how could you possibly talk about
transcendence and self transcendence if
you don't talk about art you know the
art experience is the fundamental
experience of self transcendence it's if
you don't translate if you don't change
yeah like going through an artistic
experience it isn't art it's just
decoration it's not art there's no point
with our insides transforms you you
change from the experience you become a
different person we've got an experience
that is the whole point with art
otherwise it isn't art at all and that
means that says we don't change we are
not well I think I think participatory
calls from burning on these things
actually the best talk we have right now
because when it comes to the art scene
it becomes the art galleries and the
white walls in there and the sort of
blade of commercial exploitation of the
brand their hardest things like that I
think it stinks I think so maybe let me
an art art is living in these kind of
experimental communities like Burning
Man because it can't really live in the
commercial world that just gets killed
it can't be individualist to begin with
because it does some is dead and over
it's a task a participatory and and it
was always participatory I mean you
didn't you didn't care it was the cape
painter when you walked into the cave
50,000 years ago you cared about the
transformative experience of getting raw
with a mind of tourists during a ritual
in decay right and and this is also a
psychedelics and this search for intense
experiences come back rightly properly
done psychedelics should of course be be
in the category of art it's in the
category of sex art and violence path
I constantly return to my work we cannot
talk about logos and ethos only we have
to talk about path was the third
narrative that's her sex and art and
violins are located what do you mean by
violence can you explain we mean by
violence here violence is outright
violence if I'm hunter right so if I
kill a deer and shoot it and kill it
that's violence mm-hmm it is the
confrontation between culture nature to
contain nature to keep nature to culture
nature and also the benefit of nature
it's about eating coming out in
Scandinavian I eat moose meat I eat
reindeer I eat I eat what I hunt mm-hmm
I think the current fad for veganism
yeah sure if you can save the planet by
eating more vegetables I'm fine with
that
but the current fight for veganism and
pacifism are just it just it's just so
anti phallic it's just so aggressively
magical and and and and and and I I'm
always impassive ISM whatever it rears
its ugly head in history you gotta watch
out because pacifism is always the
precursor to dictatorship and turn
mm-hmm always always it's worse all over
again watch out for it watch out for
because because you have to kill to yeah
you can't look vile inside of it I mean
it's it's part of sexuality as well it's
just that what happens is that these
guys who call themselves pacifists the
return with even more aggression but
it's passive aggression instead and
passive aggression is much harder to
handle and it's much worse more venomous
more poisonous and our society today is
full of passive aggression and passive
aggression is more obvious and that's
related to the mental ill-health problem
as well I think yes and speech policing
is the obvious example of passive
aggression when people turn away from
discussing substance and essence in a
discussion and we're moving to
technology and etiquette and they say
you must not be seen with that person or
you must not be associated with that
person when it goes into technology and
etiquette
when he leaves the streets of Paris and
moves into the salons of Versailles he
goes passive-aggressive it's the
precursor to decadence Camille Paglia
would agree with me here
Peter Dida would agree me here strongly
I'm sure you order Peter some would
agree with me here - Mariana Paulus for
the great miracle the trickster so the
the problem is that the dominant mode of
discourse in contemporary Western
society in American Europe especially
coming from academia and from media guys
passive aggression and it's poisonous
like mad and I have problem with that
Ellis in the spirituality scene we've
seen right now that's what I'm talking
about the found us and that's what I'm
talking about pathos I'm not saying
these people only talk about Lagos and
mythos all the time and go into magical
mode and who dismiss man and say that
men are evil because men are men and
shit like that that part of the
spirituality seem the sort of passive
aggressive new 8xi part of the
spirituality is something I'm turning
against mm-hmm I'm sick of it I'm tired
of it I think is it quite a bit
dangerous it led to the social justice
warriors who got running around the
street today it also led to the olds
right so we the problems who got to
think of jumper society are both coming
out of the sin if you don't want Trump
versus Sanders in the new election which
I don't mind by the way because I think
it's better to have these open
aggressive guys but you got understand
they built their powers on empires of
passive aggression and react against
Trump and Sanders with even more passive
aggression it's the only gotta make them
more powerful
yeah well agreed yeah huh yeah yeah so
that's always stuck yeah we're stuck in
decadent time passive aggression is bred
bond and passive aggression is bred on
Facebook you know yeah yeah
it's just adjusted worse and worse
because people are spending too much
time on social media
the kind of leaving Facebook on to me
that the smug and the arrogant attitude
of the passive-aggressive is what's
important here and please note the
passive-aggressive personality has no
interest in in in solutions to problems
yeah it's an interest in perpetuating
the problem because because if you
perpetuate the problem then you're
constantly stimulated they're interested
in keeping the accusation written on the
world to be used at any time weighted
system mmm-hmm so passive-aggressive
people will tell you've done something
wrong in your past
it cannot be redone you have to live
with it forever and you know eternally
damned because of it hmm yeah what you
did when you were 17 years old is that's
interesting because you're talking about
Augustine who came up with the idea of
eternal damnation necessarily it wasn't
even written in st. Paul Paul no no no
idea of like you're going to be punished
forever eternal hell but exactly if
you´d is immersion at all but you can
give you return back you go through the
hell and you come back but no this is
the problem this is a manichaean Gnostic
heritage within Christianity and it's
what Nietzsche was real you know
ferociously railing about as well right
yes and this heretic starts at the last
person empire when the surest us are
fortunate paid a price for having been
to open and to tolerance for too long
and allowed these new cults the manikins
of the master kites to prosper and the
problem with the manikins was that they
hated anything physical now think of the
guy in the schoolyard who was a bit ugly
or a bit left behind but he was clever
and smart enough to try to do the power
games he would always go after the guys
who look great and good got laid and
things like that and he would turn his
revenge against them by saying that
anything physical anything sexual
anything Pathak anything it is a
grown-up you begin stat he began sex he
begins to violence he would certainly
begin start right this is the Gnostic
and the Gnostic loves the spirit makes
the body and especially love his own
spirit because his own spirit is pure
and better and superior to other people
spirits why I don't share John for
variks enthusiasm agnosticism is that I
think he he misunderstands its origins
Gnosticism starts with the aspiration to
be superior to others not to self
transcend it is to be superior to others
again we have to go back to Girard well
you have to the Marquis like it if about
you rather than making it the comparison
the rivalry and out of rivalry if you if
you if your mind is sharp but your body
is ugly whatever you will go for the
spirit as opposed to body and you will
then regard the entire physical world as
evil and you will take down Europe from
clutter Plato and you would turn the
damn yard into the evil crater of the
physical world but you and you alone
probably and maybe a few followers of
your sect or your cult will be the true
Gnostics who will then transcend above
the rest of humanity and become gods
mm-hmm
this is the worst idea ever Gnosticism
was to the psoriatic do OB not release a
gnostic dualism but because I'm attached
to certain people who are considered to
be Gnostics but but but Gnostic like
like but but Gnostic dualism led to
Hitler right yes at least already Greece
already understand that Hitler said
Gnostic and so Stalin and so our bow and
so on Paul Pott so if the Silk Route
brought all this brilliant thinking and
the schools of Sutra Tantra and the
understanding when Talmud ology never
told you everything you and I talked
about today we wouldn't want to go back
to and we want to share it and want a
nurture and return to you if all this is
brought through the Silk Road to the
west an Avenger was vulgarized by judge
if Chisolm the Greeks and it became
Christianity and Islam and we suffered
ever since by going for the
version of thing instead of the deep
version of thing probably Christianity
Islam is that after the thought after
the construction of the populism you try
to added some depth to it and that's
almost impossible we've failed with that
in Europe with Christianity the Muslim
world has failed that when it comes to
Islam so we need to go back further
because we did export back ok can we
distinguish our secret just a thought
can we distinguish between the pop
religion and the popular religion
because yeah you need a popular religion
right but pop religion is is is I mean
you need what we did get what we did
return was what I call the dark silk
route of the 20th century I mean that's
a course Stalin Hitler Mao and Pol Pot
yeah and while China was vulnerable to
the Stalinist idea and Stalin obviously
running in Orthodox Russia Hitler
running at Protestant Germany and then
eventually Mao was running a Confucian
China and eventually we ended up with a
rose so in Cambodia under under Pol Pot
himself so these disasters is what I
call the dark the dark Silk Road the
inverted Silk Road of the 20th century
and and we we we all way to the east
maybe to to take the origin of Eastern
religion more careful more respectfully
and studied deeply but anyway you're
right pop religion and public pop is pop
culture is that it's easy and accessible
it's easy access and quick fixes in the
problem with religion is that religion
was never judged according to its
quality as a religion it was just it's
judged only because its popularity and
its usefulness for a specific power
structure mm-hmm so the reason why
Islamic Christian it became popular
we're not because people were convinced
of being Muslims or Christians not at
all these are powerful religions
Christianity because it's operated
separately from the state so the state
could do anything it wanted she became
popular with the states of Europe
because they kept the church out of
state affairs at the church took care of
the rest
so you had Christianity on one side and
yet everything else is the
site separating the two and not
containing the state under religion you
have the secular state because of it you
have the sacred and the profane operate
in parallel instead of everything being
under the sacred you become sacred and
profane operating in parallel New York
and that's what happens Christianity and
the sacred is kept by the church's own
monopoly and it's only interested in
keeping that sphere and it says that
we're all gonna die one day and go to
heaven and and that's the kingdom of God
and that's what we don't care about the
current kingdom here mm-hmm
it's just like ridiculous that that's
the first thing religion should care
about isn't it so Islam does the other
way around it creates the umma and
because in Islam you don't have a pope
you don't have a central authority you
have a local interpretation from the
woman and she has sounds absolutely
obvious you cannot even read the Quran
yourself e or Shia Muslim you have to go
to a mullah and you have to read them or
less interpretation of the Quran and
that's the only legend you can have it
because they're numerous in every
village
you can never unify she is on it it's
really constantly hard and it's constant
civil war mm-hmm and in Sunni Islam at
least you could unify it under a
caliphate and and the Caliphate would
then dictate the religion and you could
then read the Quran for yourself and you
would then agree with the Caliph and if
you don't you get your head chopped off
mmm so that's the song it sounds weak
this is obvious they never allow anybody
to leave the religion is it isn't that
the ultimate form of abuse against other
people and the ultimate evidence of
weakness you do not only can't leave out
it to leave it you can't leave you can't
divorce me yeah I think well I in in
Buddhist and in a Zen monastery I'd be
like you you would we would do quite the
opposite you would you would try to keep
people out you would say don't come yes
that's what good religion is oh and then
and then when they were there you would
say the doors open anytime you want
that's yeah that's that's the sign of a
good religion right yes it doesn't need
force to know it's genuine religion
it's it's obvious it is so damn obvious
and the only thing you and I've
discussed before in our talks in our
chats is this day is that we do like
Sufism it has problems with dualism and
it has its strong Gnostic heritage but
we like Sufism status has its origin in
Zoroastrianism Buddhism and there's a
strong Sufi revival going on right now
in Iraq and in Central Asia where a lot
of the Sufis are we discovering for our
citizen Buddhism and they're turning
away from Islam
obviously this is because of the Islamic
state and all the havoc it is costs
right so so there's a strong revival for
that which I find incredibly interesting
and I do welcome the Sufis to go back so
rashness and Buddhism stuff but many
many times who feels like every neat
witty would say that Sufism is
pre-islamic absolutely there's no doubt
about it and this is the great thing
where sera stays when Buddhism match
with in Sufism the phallic version of
Sufism is of the thesaurus term heritage
and the metrical heritage and Sufism is
obviously Buddhist that means that no
matter logical part of Sufis and cons of
Buddhism and the Aventa logical part
Constance or asterism you got the same
environment of autism as well you have
many different schools of Buddhism that
makes the sorest and thought into it
especially if you gotta go militant with
Buddhists something you're gonna do
anything that reminds you the military
for something like that you need a sore
ass Jenn Falik
version of Buddhism and obviously
Buddhism as simple as or asterism to
richly so these religions are compatible
one another up to me that the perfect
combo if anybody recommend a mix of
religions that work in Qatar presiding
do a good job at it I would recommend
people to studies resum and the Buddhism
in parallel and regard them as fairly
good magical mm-hmm
good combo rich combo monastic combo no
narcissism none of that bullshit in
there you're not forced to stay anywhere
you you started there little see there's
no need I'm a religious person yeah
there's no need to proselytize either no
that's why these are the days were all
popular as Islamic Judaism is the same
you don't you don't proselytize you
don't
you know no the Christians essentially
sent in the military to conquer new
territory and then the missionaries
walked in and more or less forced the
people who be conquered to become
Christians
that's a Christianity expanded Islam
expanded but just basically conquering
new territory and then convincing
everybody to become a Muslim otherwise
you chop their heads off
mm-hmm no there's a reason why sama
Christianity became incredibly popular
are these two religions - I'm over 1
billion followers each but that should
not impress that should not impresses at
all I mean today we need to look for
solutions - way bigger more existential
as deeper problems than Christianity and
Islam have ever been capable of dealing
with and we need to look for deep
religion and deep religion is certainly
not Islamic responds I don't find it
there
I really don't this is where I disagree
with Gerard I don't think Christianity
standard religion at all I think I think
he hasn't gone deep enough to understand
that we can have a different ending
mm-hmm yeah to this to religion oh well
I guess you see Christianity
Christianity itself is the religion that
says it's the end of religion no because
because and then this is the hard time I
have with Christians is they're always
telling you that um there's no weather
but if you believe in the uniqueness of
the West and you believe it can be an
arrogant bastard and just ignore the
rest of the world you know if you're
American or European have that attitude
towards all of the cultures like you are
superior no you're not superior at all
the printing press of the separation of
church and state made Europe successful
enough to conquer three other continents
with cannons and enforce the rest of
humanity and loads of it to become
Christians who call themselves
Christians now that's not very
impressive it's like a really bad
marriage now can we start with just
allowing people to find it for
themselves which religion do you want to
pick and be a part of can we just agree
on that
yeah can we're then going to hard work
and deep studies and try to find a
better model that this time around has
to be Imperial they are defining
Imperial model for different cultures to
collaborate one another to solve the
current existentialist problems that we
have okay and by imperially you mean a
great overarching structure which
includes just pluralistic or yeah I blew
a plural society meaning the Internet
Protocol is set itself already the new
global and constitution as you wrote in
our book the global Empire in 2003 we
said the global Empire is already a fact
because the Internet itself is a global
Empire and you can't move out of it not
even China or on anybody else and get
out of it they have to be part of it so
that is the way the world communicates
today that is how value is communicated
that is information is communicated
we're all part of the Internet our
laptops and our smartphones and
swallowed us increasingly all the other
machines are swallowing us we're being
swallowed in technology we live in a
completely technological boom belt our
bodies are located and also our bodies
are becoming more and more technological
now that means we're all moving towards
some chakra see it means the machine
will take over the world
and what we're hoping for is the Messiah
machine to save us and the Messiah
machine must not be a dictatorship
that's what we learn from history mmm
okay because dictators never learn well
I guess my dictator not a graphic
educator cannot learn that that might be
an addition of a dictator in some sense
yeah this is why Judaism goes all the
way back to the killing of Tutankhamun
and into an impost eight and his cult in
Egypt because it is to Freud obvious
that that's where you have to begin and
the Freudian patricide the killing of
the father is the killing of the father
who's overstayed his rule and this is
the dictator did the problem with the
dictator is not that it becomes the
dictator the problem of educators and
once he's faced in power he will only
have yay sayers that surround him they
would not listen to bad news any longer
and because of not listened to bad news
it will go corrupt and because it will
corrupt those who run the society under
him will manipulate the population to
stay within the corrupt system of
worship the dictator it will all go down
in flames it can only end like Hitler
and Stalin did you cannot end in any
other way so that's why maybe I'm trying
to connect that to what we have called
the London spiritual scene and the
American spiritual seamen and there's
something about that that is actually
feeding the this the dictator and yes
because the passive-aggressive people
have no understanding of plurality it's
like Trump and them Mellie the
codependent
as soon as somebody's chasing you for
your word use for your tonality for your
etiquette is usually the middle class
going after the working class that's
what he usually is but when somebody's
chasing if your behavior not to favor
ideas for you but talk more about that
the middle path going after the working
class because that s where dictatorships
always start they always start with
attacking not for your opinions but
attack you for who you are or where you
come from
from your for your tonality for your
etiquette for your behavior
they don't even discuss your ideas
because it will probably lose if they
had to so they go after you personally
and they do so precisely by pointing out
to you you've done a mistake in the past
you returned 'le damned and you must
therefore be swept away yeah so you're
you're a sinner there you're you're
you're going to burn in hell for
eternity
yeah because sin cannot be doesn't give
your sin will will not be forgiven by
God nobody because I won't even take the
responsibility of fact exact listening
putting that on you I I have to say it's
God right yeah oh there are some lynch
mob take on a sort of post Christian
approach to it and what they say is that
if you admit your mistake if you admit
your sin then you can't be forgiven and
what they do then is that they said all
because you admitted your sin you have
failed anyway so you're not part of the
future you cannot be part of the debate
you must be silenced you must be deep
platformed you must be cancelled
you must be cancelled yeah ego ego now
these are very very dangerous times and
I I am more adamant than ever that if
people get upset about my behavior my
tonality my ticket instead of my
absolute arguments I will be pissed off
with them and probably leave them to it
and you know I'm going to go into
debates with all kinds of figures from
the extreme right and extreme left and
Muslims of Christians or what it what
have it all right I debate with anybody
I'm totally totally Pro the debate Pro
free speech Pro heretics Pro the
weirdest strangest ideas and try to
extend the freedom of thought the
freedom must be just much as you
possibly can today because it's dead
important we live in an age where this
has become the ultimate struggle we are
built on a struggle and that's why I
want to keep the Internet as open as
possible and why I'm adamant that he
must keep the algorithm clean and free
and that is to keep the algorithm free
both from commercial corruption and
from political manipulation mm-hmm we
gotta keep politics and capitalism out
of the algorithm heard over the Internet
mm-hmm out of the internet keep the
internet free and open keep the album
free if Google don't keep the Rodman
free and clean leave Google and go
somewhere else when you search if
Microsoft or Amazon are not giving you
the proper algorithm or they start
manipulate the algorithms and they let
money or politics influence the
algorithm leave build your own new
algorithm it's not that hard you gotta
get out of these systems if these
systems cannot be trusted and as far as
I'm concerned it's the two old failed
systems called capitalist and communist
and they're the problem here where
capitalism really is I would say the
name of the commercial corruption of the
algorithm and communists and although
I'd hate to say it because I love the
word but I think that it's properly used
today as the word for a political
manipulation of the algorithm but you
immediately discovered that this is what
what I've tried to do in America that's
that's great you have you have Trump
versus Sanders again yes yeah yeah yeah
yeah capitalism versus communism and the
solution arrives to be hey girlie and
say no to both and build an algorithm
outside of use territory the Trump and
Sanders cannot corrupt or manipulate so
you can keep it clean and free because I
don't trust the tech giants to be able
to do this I don't trust them to be able
to keep the algorithm clean and free all
the labor and money from putting
advertising on the side I think
political manipulation will be
influencing these algorithms
increasingly I want to do you're not
gonna get a fair and just version of how
the world operates the great deal with
algorithm it says it's only possible
follows today the only possible fouling
order we can get in the current chaos is
the algorithm so we need to try to stay
in an anarchic mode and and let things
be and try to keep the world as free and
open as possible yeah so that's what you
liked about the Weinstein conversation
probably because with Bret Easton Ellis
yes with Prezi sternos that's what they
were I think it's wonderful
so those two guys was kind of saying in
there there they're kind of saying that
highly recommended listing especially
the second hour of the brief Bret Easton
Ellis and Eric Lang shine conversation
not only spread taste and I was
brilliant a real priest today I would
say if you want to listen to guys out
there to get it right Peter Thiel is
deaf at the guy you should check out and
Bjorn Lomborg is the guys check out and
Bret Easton Ellis another no you should
check out mmm so check out these guys
they're right there good the good guys
they get it think that their heart
direct plays in a very very clever and
to get the seriousness of the current
situation and always always listen to
come up all in Jordan Peterson for God's
sake but it's these guys get it right
and what practicing artists manage to do
is that he gets the best out of every
client it mm-hmm this is a great
conversation the second half of the
conversation is well they're kind of
lamenting the fact that that the
millennial generation is is afraid to be
edgy right to say to fray it's afraid of
life it's is afraid of life and they're
saying that is right of sex he's afraid
of violence and it's a better generation
Generation X or whatever is supposed to
be called or my generation or maybe
you're a bit older than me but is is at
least in that generation there was there
was a kind of edginess and extreme
tolerance you know because I think all
of this stuff that people are
celebrating today like they're not
celebrating anything they live in a very
noble but there's this like there's
there's this ideology that are enough
tolerance today right but there's no
tolerance there's no tolerance but at
least in the 90s in the beginning when
pep rally was around and that kind of
thing there was like a there was a kind
of a real kind of Tolerance aura or
people didn't give a shit about gender
or you know I think it is and the reason
why people still live in a postmodernist
paradigm is because they're allowed to
play around with logos and mythos as the
es if these two are the only
to still exist and then they say well it
cannot be anything that's logos you can
only be mythos and because again only
with us they can only be power behind
what you say so if you're a powerful
person must keep your mouth shut and the
powerless speak and then society comes
to standstill and it influence because
it's about who speaks is not about
what's been said here's new you left
completed the debate is no longer about
what's being said and the quality of
what's being said is all about who
speaks now if that means you moved into
kindergarten territory you no longer
grown up and this is the shit and the
reason why post-modernism is around what
we're working with on the new book said
activist tonight he's thought we want to
explode post-modernism by bringing past
us back into the picture because I'm
pathos comes back into the picture with
sex and art and violence it becomes
absolutely clear but it wasn't a mythic
monopoly at all but logo Smith hasn't
passed the three different stories that
need to be told and then totally
different totally different purposes in
being the General Grant narrative the
grand narrative has to contain all three
logos is of course science and reality
and and mythos is a story we tell each
other about moving ahead the next it's
all about getting on the move the next
day that today's Netflix when it fixed
it's at its best
even if Netflix is becoming too
politically correct too so it's a
sexuality and art and violence and and
brutal interruption it's the real in
Jacques Lacan if it's when the real
interferes with the imaginary and the
symbolic orders hmm but imagine er the
symbolic again our mythos and logos and
then comes past us into the picture the
real and what the real comes into the
picture it explodes the coronavirus has
just done it September 11 did the same
thing
it's when the thunderbolt hits you and
hits your society and suddenly
everything's shaken up and you don't
know who to trust any longer and you
realize you live in a very contingent
world we can trust yourself right that
is something you need to be constantly
reminded of and that's what sex does
that's what art should do and as our art
is dead today and needs to be
resurrected and that's also what
violence
so bad so these forces are Pathak as if
pathless is what you don't want your
children to know about yet but you know
your children will have one day have to
be confronted with because without being
confronted with pathos they cannot be
grownups mm-hmm amazing you want to
avoid pathos you tried to escape it and
you live in in the Gnostic age where you
got me learners who are incredibly
Gnostic an obsessive tonality netiquette
decadence in the worst possible sense
that is a very dangerous time to live in
hmm yeah we're gonna see increased
censorship and increased passive
aggression all over in society or not
not not more no please really and Gus
yes we just just see at the beginning of
it sorry Andrew I don't think I could
survive any more passive aggression I
really do I think it's just gonna I
don't think I could do it anymore
the only proper response is to be openly
aggressive I guess so I guess that's
what I need to be loud mouth it's a need
to learn to be a need to learn to be
more of a know well or support people
who are sad with the tricksters stand
with the tricksters for me it's the
people who attack and and try to ignore
my Liana polish where the ones are
really dangerous today for me he Mariana
Pollack they defended by Camille Paglia
you're the Petersons Alex on the board
and we all defending the guy because
he's a genuine trickster mm-hmm it
doesn't mean to support his ideas
although I do to a certain extent but
it's a port lawyer you don't you know I
heard that he is I don't think even he
does you support that figure the
tricksters aren't more important than
ever
and if people go after the tricksters
the scapegoat the tricksters which is
what the passive-aggressive lynch mobs
are doing today that's a sick society
yeah so do the tricks that's really
important that's not about me and you
who is going after the trickster or it
tries to ignore the trickster who
escaped go to the back and the trickster
is gonna make you feel uncomfortable
right the trickster yes there's nothing
there's not gonna feed you problem or or
or even stimulate you intellectually in
the way you wanted
stimulated he's going no no no he's
gonna be tough and it's gonna hurt and
it's an easy needed huh he's the guy
test the free speech he detested freedom
of thought and if you embrace him and
say that not he's the trickster he
should be allowed to speak that way she
could love to spit at the king he wants
to eat he's allowed to turn power upside
down when everyone's to question all the
norms that we take him for granted
that's what the trickster should do and
must do and the tricksters are not more
important than ever and anybody who goes
after the tricksters day is not a friend
of mine any longer
that's how serious I'm about this now
it's just that I am tired of the
passive-aggressive lens ball I am tired
of people protecting their own asses
because the protected careers I'm tired
of that I find no respect left for that
whatsoever because it's even worse even
worse of being a sort of leader of
passive aggressive Nussbaum it's a play
with that lynch mob and say that but I
can't risk my career I can't risk me
saying so I have two little ends from do
whatever he wants to those the people
you disrespect the most at the end of
the day those are the people who totally
lack integrity and among man we call
them these are the guys who lack dick
Yeah right the non phallic they're their
cup colds that's the another word for it
yeah yeah God isn't it funny that Peter
Thiel and Bjorn Lomborg Lambrakis
tanana's are all officially gay yeah
well I think the trickster the gay is
the gay the gay guy is born to be ha I'm
not sure they are gay I'm you know I
live in a male bonding relationship
myself so I live with another man but I
got a girlfriend I'm not sure we would
define them as gay in the traditional
sense but if they're not gay the
definitely shamanic so the shamanic guys
only once we can trust right now great
talking to you Andrew yeah yeah I think
I think our concerns started to bubble
up towards the end yeah