every man should do this you know like
there's not enough good positive role
models and information for men there
educates men on how to be better men and
we all need as a species just makes you
see how everyday you go and make
yourself small and you compromise and
you don't step fully into your potential
and that there was something I really
felt in that room I'm getting a glimpse
of hey what if you just dared there is a
real act of courage require to fully
show up and tell the truth to other men
and you know for me doesn't come
naturally necessarily to give that level
of trust but the more the space builds
and the more the trust builds within the
group the easier that becomes and then
the feeling is one not just of release
but one of dignity and strength and
being kind of fully in my power I think
all men could use a good shot of that
energy and I think all women would be
really happy if all men did I'm feeling
empowered I'm feeling strongly I feel
like brothers it's not just about this
weekend it's about creating something
defining what what is being a man now
very few of us got this from our fathers
so being able to give this to each other
in a space like this is really valuable
what I found particularly helpful was
arriving here and it being mostly
strangers and by the end of the weekend
we're able to offer each other insights
that are deeply powerful and very
insightful that not just make me feel
good at the moment but I can take away
and harness in my everyday life it was
incredibly constructive it you know
things I am a father
I intend to pass lots of these teachings
to my son I think there's lots of the
stuff to have done today that will make
me a better man I believe that in spaces
like this we really get to
feel those masculine energies the fires
the vulnerability whatever but in in a
space of understanding that no actually
this is a beautiful gift you know it's
something something to be trusted in
something the world really really needs
you never knew that you were missing
this but you are you you don't know that
this is what you've actually wanted your
entire life but it is
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]