[Music]
another key concept from integral theory
can perhaps resolve the well-known
dispute between jordan peterson and sam
harris but they couldn't even agree on
the nature of truth
Wilbur describes how reality can be
viewed most accurately as four quadrants
or four different lenses interior an
exterior
individual and collective the quadrants
are equally valid but distinct each has
its own rules for gathering knowledge
and truths that apply only to the
segment of reality it's focused on from
this perspective Harris was insisting on
a scientific objective definition of
truth while peterson was more interested
in a cultural definition truth as
culturally agreed and transmitted
through myth and story four integral
both the right but incomplete famously
jordan peterson and sam harris had these
major debates some probably the most
high-profile debates between atheism and
religious belief and a lot of people
said they were really fascinating
conversations but on in some sense it
sounded like they were talking past each
other and i know you have this concept
of different forms of truth and the
different quadrants of truth could you
briefly explain do you think that helps
to explain what was going on yeah and if
so how sure we talked about the good to
true in the beautiful we talked about
manual counts three critiques we talked
about your you're gonna orbit masters as
three validity claims and said that
those three are a a condensed version of
four quadrants and what they really
amount to is that the four quadrants
means that you can look at any happening
from in at least two major ways you can
look at it from the inside or from the
outside from a subjective view or from
an objective view and you can look at it
as an individual a singular event
or a plural event so every individual
human for example exists in a series of
collectives and so if you put those
together you get four quadrants you need
the inside and the outside of an
individual and a collective and all
three of those are very real
perspectives that show very real
dimensions and those dimensions do turn
out to be the foundation of those other
items that I was mentioning I'd
previously mentioned first second and
third person perspective so the first
person perspective we defined as the
person who is speaking that's an i or we
or me mine
that's the interior of an individual
what we call the upper left quadrant so
that's an eye space and it would be your
in our mosses validity claim for example
of truthfulness or it would also be
their beauty in the eye of the beholder
or any of the subjective beliefs that
you happen to have and that are true
existing truths for you
those exists together and collectives
and so those aren't just subjective
they're inter subjective and they
involve not just me being aware of me
but me also being aware of you for
example so second person is defined as
the person being spoken to so in this
case you're a second person I'm talking
so I'm first person and the goal of our
dialogue in some sort of mutual
discussion where your subjective space
and my subjective space will resonate
together closely enough that I can say I
think I understand what you say I
understand what you mean and you can
look at me and say yeah I think I
understand what you mean so we have a
kind of mutual understanding that has to
do not with
individual truthfulness or individual
aesthetics or beauty doesn't have to do
with objective truth either it has to do
with inter subjective values inner
subjective goodness ethics how we treat
each other as individual subjects
would that be more Jordan Peterson than
relative to Sam Harris yes yes they do
you tend to emphasize different
quadrants we're Sam even though he'll
say things like consciousness is real
conscious is the only thing that can't
be doubted you can look at consciousness
in a kind of objective way and there are
subjective truths that kind of stuff he
still has a tendency to interpret what
that means from a third-person
deterministic fashion so he'll say
things like using Charles Whitmore the
guy that got in the Texas tower and shot
up a bunch of people he told his jailers
that when he died doing autopsy because
something was wrong with his brain and
they did found a tumor and so Sam will
say okay that's when we really
understand everything about neural
physiology
we'll understand all of evil behavior
just like this tumor is causing Whitmore
to do that but just the problem with
that is it's just too extremist a
version of it because even if the tumor
can get you towards really antisocial
behavior it didn't say get in this
particular tower at this particular time
using this particular gun shoot exactly
these many people cause exactly these
many deaths but that's the deterministic
mechanism that he demands in order to
interpret what's arising and again
that's just you have two fundamental
unprovable choices about how you want to
view
relative world its ass arising and there
either is the creative advance into
novelty or there isn't and I find the
creative advance into novelty much much
more reflective of the world as it is
arising and in terms of any sort of
ultimate truth that's where they're
waking up the traditions simply come
down and say actually you can't say
anything about the relative world in in
an ultimate truth because all of our
concepts make sense only in terms of
their opposites the pleasure pain
good/bad infinite finite up down in out
so all of our concepts based on
opposites but ultimate reality has no
opposite so we really can't
conceptualize it and the real genius of
mahayana buddhism guy named the gardener
basically came out and his whole notion
of emptiness is that you can't literally
say anything about the relative world
that will end up being absolutely true
because you'll always end up
contradicting yourself so he had a very
very sophisticated dialectic it
basically said take any characteristic
you want it can be free will or it can
be terminus 'm it can be consciousness
or it can be matter it can be truth or
it can be falsity and call that X and
then he demonstrates that the reality
actually is neither X nor non X nor both
nor neither nothing you can say about
the world is ultimately correct
including what I just said and including
what I just said there and that too and
the whole point of negara and all of my
honor Buddhism anniversary all the
world's mystics agree is that in order
to see this ultimate reality you have to
directly experience it you
actually waken it yourself and until
that happens everything you say about
it's wrong because you're just not in
touch with it so you can say oh it's God
it's not God it's atheistic because it
doesn't matter you still don't know it
so everything you're saying is
ultimately not right and you keep doing
that until you awaken the second mode of
knowing that plugs you in to this direct
first-person experience of a ground of
all being
that's called enlightenment that's
called awakening and so on and that
really is a mystery and that's when the
guards are called it emptiness easy it
can need to be called void nor not void
but in order to point it out we call it
the void and the whole point of that is
you keep doing these meditative
practices until you awaken that mode of
awareness and then you have this direct
experience and it can neither be
described as deterministic or freewill
causal or free and that's the ultimate
state of a Buddhist or mystical
orientation so we'll be getting those
kinds of arguments that's at least one
thing worth keeping in mind you can
still give your relative arguments about
which seems to work best in the relative
realm and that's why I say that a
creative advance into novelty turns out
to be probably the best way to describe
that and so even somebody like Daniel
Dennett who is often argued with sam
Harris Gannett maintains that evolution
does produce a degree of increasing
degrees of freedom or what he'll call
Evatt ability as opposed the
inevitability which is determinism and
evolution produces degrees of freedom
and those are very real and even Sam
will say I'm not even sure I can explain
the difference between me and Daniel
because he realizes if you actually push
that deterministic position it really
gets into into problems and doesn't work
very well
the whole notion of some degree of
freedom that in itself is very hard to
describe adequately because as soon as
you say what that free choice is you can
always come up or some something that
preceded it and it was outside of your
control and so you never really looked
like you have freedom but again you can
do the same thing to that opposite
belief because you're both just you're
arguing opposites in a world that
ultimately is is beyond opposites but
Mike Murphy quotes an evolutionary
biologist who went back to look at the
evolutionary record and attempted to
determine the number of genuine
transformations that occurred in that
evolutionary unfolding and a
transformation is defined as as the
introduction of an emergent quality and
emergent means new means it never
happened before means that nothing like
it happened before it's radically novel
it's probably the creative advancing
into novelty course they're interesting
is that I don't know how this person
came up with this but the number of
minor transformations in evolution were
six hundred thousand the number of major
transformations and I don't know what
the distinction was between that but
that was between twenty and a hundred
but the point is there's a there's
newness emerging in this evolutionary
stream and that's how we went from just
simple quarks to the sauna so
Shakespeare the undeniable fact of that
is it novelty it's just all over the
bloody place and if you have strict
determinism you can't get that it's not
going to happen and so you just have to
end up making a choice you just sort of
stare at science and say well it looks
like every event has a cause
you run into the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle and it says no it doesn't is
actually probabilistic so determinist
determinism is strictly shot right there
anyway or you acknowledge that however
this happens there is a creative
emergence of novelty and you're having
thoughts right now that in part are
emergent they're a bit of newness that's
never ever ever happened before and even
if we knew all of the factors in your
brain and everything else is affecting
you and by the way you were affected by
a billion other factors all of which
have to be determined in order for that
to happen
even if we knew all of that there's
still a capacity that novelty is going
to emerge in your case they only happen
six hundred thousand times in evolution
and even sam harris has at least six
novel ideas before breakfast and he acts
that way so that kind of argument just
sort of goes back and forth and back and
forth and you can get very bright people
like Dennett arguing very similar to sam
harris like sam says he really can't
tell the difference between him and done
it but then it argues four degrees of
freedom and sam argues for not what
happens with the Sam Harris and Jordan
Peterson is how they come down on that
side of this ultimate mystery of what's
happening and however much Sam
acknowledges that ultimate unity
consciousness and its subjectivity is
real and all of that he does tend to
come down on the side of third-person
objective realism and so if we could
know all of brain Neri neurophysiology
at some point he specifically says then
we would understand all of evil and
presumably be able to fix that and again
that's just pushing it way way way too
far and that's what peterson will do he
won't push it that far in that direction
so he's always coming up with these
factors that have a different type of
truth value and we said earlier that
there were a narrow version of truth
isn't the good the true and the
beautiful and that was just sort of a
narrower objective truth but that all
three of them could be considered
different types of truth in the broad
sense and that's what Peterson is always
acknowledging and so I think one of the
weinstein brothers came up in the
nursing metaphoric truth however we want
to consider it there are truths that
don't come down to just third-person
objective exterior realistic truths and
those are very very real realities and
if nothing else how we get to those is
different from how we get to a mere
objective understanding so how we
understand that atoms make up molecules
is different in terms of how we
understand what you and I should be
doing in both senses there's an overall
type of truthfulness to whatever we're
saying there's an isness to whatever
we're saying so even if my values arise
in my awareness if I'm aware of them
they have an isness they exist they're
phenomenologically real and so I can say
well that's the isness that's real and
then in same is true for the good the
true the beautiful they all have an
isness factor and that's what Sam the
focus is on because he'll just say well
we're just navigating through this world
and we just make choices and these are
better or worse but there are things
that are ultimately true and he focuses
on the business of that and that's what
we should that's what we should go for
and again that's that's fine but the
methods that you get to those is those
are still different
and that's harbormaster's validity
claims it is the good that you are in
the beautiful it is quadrants and Sam is
focusing on those right-hand exterior or
purses and Jordan acknowledges those but
he's always coming up with some very
real left-hand how in terms of values
and I don't necessarily agree with all
he says but I absolutely agree with his
addressing that dimension and that issue
because that is real that is there and
that cannot be reduced objective science
it's very interesting because Jordan
Peterson Sam Harris had a two-hour
conversation where they couldn't agree
about the definition of truth I know I
know can you can you explain why they
couldn't agree well yeah because they
they couldn't there each talking from a
different one of these perspectives and
the fact is all four of those are
correct that's the whole point about an
integral approach is that everybody is
right and so again it's not who's right
and who's wrong it's how they all fit
together and these were two relatively
good arguments being given for some very
different truth perspectives and they
were both right and that's why there's
there's this kind of begrudging
agreement they'll both see the other
person's argue and go well I can't
really disagree with that but here's the
part that's not being included and then
they'll talk about their perspective
truths and how it is different from this
one and so they're saying something
that's not getting included in the other
person's argument and they'll go okay
but then often the other side will say
well I don't disagree with that it's
just here's this other stuff that you're
not including and this aren't went back
and forth in back and forth and you see
in a sense the same thing with Daniel
Dennett and Sam Harris and their
argument on free will they agree on
almost everything in a certain sense
about neurophysiology but one of them is
arguing from a first-person
perspective where one of the
phenomenological realities that you have
mostly is a type of free agency you
don't experience hard to Turman ism but
something like a manual can't he wants
to get you from a position that he
considers unfree which is hetero no me
in other is your other directed your
thoughts are your own you're a
conformist you're a part of the herd
mentality you're governed by other
people's thoughts and you can tell if
that's happening you don't have to wait
way down the road when we understand all
of neurophysiology and can you explain
all of evil behavior according to sam
harris whether you know the all of the
functioning of neurophysiology
you do know if you're being a conformist
or if you doing what Kant wants you to
do which is to be not hetero no me but
aa tana me yourself determining in the
sense of you're creating your own
thoughts you're having your own
viewpoints you're not conformist you're
not other determined and one of the
major forms of the free will determinism
argument is that one version of
determiners it means just certainly hard
determinism that means absolutely
everything is determined and again Sam
doesn't actually believe that but he
does tend to fall back on giving us
examples from that type of thing and
making those types of claims and so when
he argues against free will he's
actually arguing there's a fairly
well-known philosopher highly respected
his last name's pronounced differently
but it's spelled P L AM T ing a Alvin
latina however you pronounce that and he
points out there what sam harris is
arguing against is what alvin calls
maximal autonomy
and Alvin points out that did almost
none of the believers in free will
believe that there's maximal autonomy
that just means you radically free and
have no constraints on you whatsoever
almost everybody that believes in some
sort of free will believe that there are
constraints and in integral review we
have what's called a cosmic address
which is simply when you add up all of
the various dimensions that a particular
hole on is that what is quadrant is
where the tsavo is where this line is
where the state of consciousness is what
it's type is that gives you it's sort of
location in this manifest universe and
all of those constrain your activity
right now they're all determining it to
some degree in that sense but then
there's also a degree of freedom within
that and that can't be reduced to just
just determinism so the idea of freedom
is free agency which is what Jordan
peterson and Denon tend to argue is that
thieves can't Spurgeon even right now
even if we don't know all of
neurophysiology whether it's determined
or not we do know if we're being
conformist or for acting more on our own
wishes and desires we can tell that
right now we know if we're doing that
right now or not and if we do become
more autonomous then we are freer from
the constraints and demands of a herd
mentality and a hetero no --mess
existence which is not a very creative
autonomous individual existence and we
can do that whether or not there's brain
determinism or not I mean maybe my brain
is totally determined right now I can
still make that choice and the one is
free and the other isn't free so that's
the type of free will arguments that
most believers in free will argue it's
not what Sam tends to argue he tends to
argue this hard determinism
then with a maximal autonomy not very
many people do that during Peterson's
not doing that and Daniel Dennett's not
doing that so what Sam is tending to do
is fall back on these right-hand
exterior third-person perspectives that
do tend to look more deterministic
strictly deterministic what's Peterson
is doing is arguing from these interior
subjective and inter subjective
dimensions that are also very real and
cannot be determined according to merely
objective exterior realism categories
and so they really are in that sense
even though they do find that if they
kind of push into each other that they
there's some real sort of core
agreements they really are
differentiating in large measure
according to these different quadrants
these different perspectives that they
are taking as most fundamentally real
they acknowledge the others but they
tend to to really come back and
emphasize those particular perspectives
especially when the other person isn't
including them and that tends to be the
way the argument goes is Sam will argue
that that's just not right and then
Jordan will say well that's just not
right
and so they get into that kind of lockup
now even though they both sort of
acknowledge the existence of all of them
but one of the real fundamental
differences is just that they're coming
from these different perspectives those
different perspectives are real and each
different perspective shows a real
dimension of reality it really exists
it's really there and you can't argue it
away and that's why they don't ever
really give up on the argument I mean
this is really just totally obvious it
wouldn't be a perennial unsolvable
philosophical question in the West like
the mind-body
problem primary quality and the primary
problem in all those those are really
fundamental issues in part because it
does come down to that mystical notion
that ultimately all of these concepts
are based on opposites and ultimate
reality isn't an opposite so you're
always going to get caught up in these
kinds of argument and you're never going
to be able to argue them fully the only
way you're gonna be able to know the
real answer to any of that is to
experience that pure ground and then
that will solve the issue for you in a
direct and immediate sense
[Music]
you
[Music]