[Music]
hello you found the portal I'm here
today with my guest in studio Ben
Greenfield down from Washington State
Ben welcome to the program thank you and
hello and hello sir
so you are the first health guest I
think that we've had on the program we
can talk about other things but you've
had healthy guests we've had help in
shellfish okay yeah and what I wanted to
talk to you about is a little bit this
issue of how we sort through our bodies
and our minds as mechanical systems what
do we do with integrating the tremendous
amount of information some some of the
literature in the biomedical field is
almost unreadable and it's extremely
confusing you have small studies you
don't have a lot of discipline across
different different fields to keep any
kind of interoperability and so I've
always been afraid to enter this space
but you've been recommended is one of
the countries or if not the world's top
trainers you've been an extreme athlete
you've been studying this from an
academic perspective and you seem the
ideal person to be our jungle guide into
the wilds of what is known about us
aside from the extreme athlete piece
I don't think masochism lends any any
great deal of credibility to one aside
from a little bit of time spent testing
things like you know ketones and
carbohydrate mixes in the trenches and
finding out what might give you
explosive diarrhea but uh but I I do
love to read I love to study this stuff
I've always been a voracious and curious
consumer I just figure if we can profit
from your pain that seems like a pretty
good deal well yeah yeah maybe a little
bit but yeah you're right it is
difficult with you know closed access to
many of these journals and you know the
ability to be able to review an abstract
and as we were discussing before we
started recording you know an inability
to determine whether or not a fasting
study was done on a male or a female
population or you know whether or not a
headline that might say vilify red meat
is actually
at the lifestyle practices of the people
consuming said meats or the the sourcing
you know process versus unprocessed
there's just so many so many nuances to
take into consideration and I think the
saving grace though is that we live in
an era now where the type of self
quantification that would have been
prohibitively expensive ten years ago is
now readily affordable and available in
the comfort of your own home in many
cases and so I think that and we we can
delve into this if you would like the
ability to be able to gather data about
your own body and then decide what type
of nutrition or exercise
I just loved inhalation protocol would
be appropriate for you allows you to
bypass a lot of this epidemiological
data that paints with a very broad brush
so these are all great topics I mean one
of the great mysteries since you've
already brought up explosive diarrhea
we've probably lost now for illicit
herbs with that one is why is my you
know why is my toilet not a laboratory
that isn't always taking data away from
what I'm passing through me right or
your toilet paper exactly well your
toilet paper and a dongle on your iPhone
and yeah that's that's one of the tests
that's certainly very helpful I I think
actually more helpful than these newer
microbiome companies that are making a
lot of predictions based on biome data
collected from stool that don't have a
lot of research behind them such as you
know we've tested your stool and
determine that based on your biome data
you should be on X Y Z probiotic that we
are by the way manufacturing and selling
but there are other tests that you can
do that I think are very helpful and we
we can start with the bathroom since
we're there already
not literally we're gonna have to get
back to like it just introduced to you
but we're already you're not actually
sitting on porcelain these chairs are
more comfortable the there are tests
like you know I run once a year a test
from Genova Diagnostics it's a three-day
stool panel and a multi-day collection
is important because you're every
from parasitic activity to yeast fungus
bacteria all that changes on a
day-to-day basis and you can learn a
great deal about your gut and
inflammatory markers in your gut
bacterial balance the presence or
absence of parasites or you know yeasts
or something like Candida for example by
simply on a yearly basis doing doing a
panel like this you literally for three
days in a row just swab and it goes into
a little tube you keep that much of the
chagrin of my wife typically in the
refrigerator until all your your poop is
ready to ship off to FedEx right and you
receive a beautiful PDF in two weeks
that's got everything you would need to
know about whether or not you might need
to say supplement with a digestive
enzyme because you have low pancreatic
enzyme production or whether you
actually do need to take that popular
cleansing supplements because you have
some kind of a parasitic overgrowth or
something like I'm gonna actually want
to get back to this issue of your wife
because I think the issue of whether or
not your behavior is viewed as bizarre
by your family has a lot to do with
whether or not most people can stick to
a regime I mean I am someone who
believes that in general institutional
wisdom is usually so polluted by the
economic incentives of the institutions
that I'm always open to the idea that
the conventional wisdom is exactly what
you would expect when institutions have
perverse incentives but if everyone in
your family or your social environment
doesn't worry about these things the
same way you might and isn't sort of
willing to take responsibility for you
know you break it you bought it style
approach can be very difficult to you
know to get somebody to go along with
putting your stool in the refrigerators
if that was normal let's let's get to
that in a second so I can at least sort
of get some sacrum from yeah can you
just give us a very quick sketch of your
academic and non-academic experience
that brings you to being one of the most
sought-after
fitness experts yes academically I
attended University of Idaho not
necessarily known for its its rigorous
health and medical program but I studied
exercise physiology and biomechanics
there because for for most of my younger
years I was most interested in exploring
the boundaries of human performance and
how to maximize human performance which
in retrospect is a far cry from
enhancing health or longevity and there
are many people who are you know fit on
the outside but once you take a look at
blood and biomarkers and what make me go
exactly yeah some of the self
quantification we were talking about
earlier it actually can often fly in the
face of longevity to be operating at
peak performance however I studied that
at University of Idaho and competed in
in tennis and in bodybuilding and water
polo and volleyball just played a lot of
sports and progressed from there to
almost 20 years of competing in
professional endurance sports and doing
things like Ironman triathlon and
Spartan racing obstacle course racing
and adventure racing and just all sorts
of kind of masochistic multi-day type of
events which we're interesting to me
just from a pure physiological
standpoint because those are those are
really sports of attrition right where
you must have pretty robust management
of everything from macronutrients to
things that would affect fatigue more
dramatically than say you know baseball
where you might be you know sitting in
the dugout and if you if you stop moving
you know many cases you're still gonna
be okay and and that was a great
playground for me to explore a lot of
the nutrition on the performance and the
recovery concepts that have been toying
around with and still utilize but I also
I'm just a voracious consumer of content
you know I pour through research every
morning I read a lot of journals I read
try to read a book every day you know
typically it's in the health or the
performance or the nutrition realm and I
podcast blog can we plug your podcast
it's just the Ben Greenfield fitness
podcast the probably narcissistic title
that doesn't lend itself well to
branding but that's that's that's my
podcast and I write books I just
finished a 650 page book on on all
things anti-aging longevity gut immune
system hormones just kind of delved into
every nook and cranny of human
physiology validity quite a bit in there
and heart rate variability that's an
interesting interesting topic that you
bring up are you is that something
you're interested in er you must know
joonyoung of palo alto partners who was
a physician turned sort of hedge fund
manager i do not uh so we were talking
about how to make radical longevity a
normal part of health and physiology and
because it had this sort of bizarre
patina of i don't know a quixotic desire
to find the Fountain of Youth there was
a period of time where it would had to
be de-risked by Silicon Valley so it was
sort of almost seen as being immoral to
pursue radical longevity as a research
program in our breda grey and Peter teal
and various people were instrumental in
kind of taking taking the slings and
arrows from the outside world so this is
rich people trying to live forever on
the backs of everyone else but Jun was
instrumental in trying to work through
the system by giving some money for the
Palo Alto Prize and he asked me to give
the keynote and was a lot about talking
and we were talking a lot about if you
strip off things like environmental
insult or the burden of disease or
self-harm or all of these other things
that one can die from are you left in
the end with trade-offs between cancer
and aging senescence and do we
understand the essence and so June's
perspective was that heart rate
variability was the best concrete marker
to target to proxy for improving
longevity in a meaningful way because he
is theory was about homeostatic capacity
can you get back to him absolutely I
would say pushing aside some of the more
fringe markers out there that you can
track for longevity let's say there's
something like telomere length or or a
horvath methylation clock or any of
these things that are close fringe I
would say that they're just bad proxies
yeah they're poor proxies they're also
less they're less available and less
scalable and less affordable for the
general population complete snob appeal
yeah compared to what I would consider
to be three very useful markers to track
overall health and longevity and that
would be glycemic variability and how
often is the blood sugar fluctuating
throughout the day and to what extent is
the sugar remaining in the bloodstream
versus transiently passing due to you
know physical activity or good insulin
sensitivity or good blood sugar
management something that can be
measured via twenty to thirty dollar
blood stick from CVS or Walgreens or
something I wore the entire year last
year and gleaned a great deal of
actionable data from a Dexcom g6
continuous blood glucose monitor which
allowed me to see everything from blood
glucose response to a cup of coffee to a
plate of green beans to - you know
exposure to heat versus cold and I
learned some very interesting things for
example the the blood glucose Rises
dramatically in response to a cup of
coffee which is actually what you'd want
you know it's mildly hyper cortisol ik
and you know it gives you a surge of
energy and that sugar assuming that the
coffee is is black and doesn't have a
lot of calories in it that sugar is is
mostly
glycogen all
it's released from the liver and it's a
short spike in blood glucose and doesn't
contribute a great deal to glycemic
variability but I found it interesting
how high the blood glucose Rises after a
simple cup of black coffee in the
morning
so was the narrow pee narrow peak I also
found that that my blood glucose
responded quite dramatically to green
beans of all things which which were
kind of a staple in my diet and so
because of that I went out and got what
I would consider to be one of the gold
standard food allergy tests out there
that doesn't give you a laundry list of
false positives it's called a cyrex food
allergy panel see Y re X and it turns
out that one of the only foods that I
produce a significant immunoglobulin
reaction towards is green beans and the
blood glucose response that I saw after
eating a vegetable was actually my body
mounting an inflammatory autoimmune
based response no blue that with a
vegetable right but I gave him he gave
me a clue that I was able to dig more
deeply into I also found something very
useful and quite useful for us since
we're sitting in a cold room right now
the the best thing I could do to lower
glycemic variability and keep my blood
glucose stable the entire day was a
brief bout of cold in the morning just
two to five minutes cold shower cold
soak jump in a cold river dramatically
controlled blood glucose the rest of the
day so glycemic variability would be one
thing that I think is important to
measure inflammation would be a second
inflammation is a little bit trickier
because it does require a blood
measurement that's typically right now
requires you go to it to a lab to do a
blood draw but I'm talking about getting
a measurement of something like HSC RP
to see if your your C reactive protein
is low there are other inflammatory
markers like fibrinogen or homocysteine
or cytokines that you can measure but
but doing something like a quarterly
measurement of just your HSC RP levels
you know that's that's a 30 to $40 lab
test that you can run that also is
because inflammation is so tied to
stress on a variety of other health
conditions you see they responded
something like dairy it can respond to
food allergies it can respond to stress
it can respond to and this is something
to be careful with in terms of the
timing of when you run the test exercise
can elevate it significantly which is
why sometimes if someone does a hard
weight training session or a run then
does their fasted lab test the next
morning the results come back show
elevated CRP and a doctor wants them to
go in for a heart panel and spend a
whole bunch of money when their CRP was
just elevated due to the size the diaper
the newest monitoring is that it has
really shown us just how inadequate it
is to pick some random moment things
then might decide that that is where
your body is because your body may just
be passing through that value of
whatever it is it needs to precisely
controlled and when you look at hormones
it's even more important because if you
look at the the gold standard right now
for hormone measurement at least what's
used predominantly and then we can get
back to heart rate variability which I
would consider to be the third
measurement to look at in addition to
glycemic variability and inflammation
but when you look at hormones for
example you know most tests are running
a fasted blood draw in the morning of
testosterone estrogen DHEA what have you
but hormones fluctuate widely throughout
the day and because of this I think that
that a urinary measurement for hormones
you know there there's another test that
that I think is great for self
quantification it's called a Dutch panel
- dried urine test you pee on a stick
five times during the day and you get a
running value of where your hormone
levels are fluctuating throughout the
entire day so that you can see if you're
truly whatever high cortisol low
cortisol high testosterone low
testosterone etc and furthermore urine
tests will show you the upstream and
downstream metabolites of a hormone and
the reason that's important is because
many people will for example get a blood
measurement of their cortisol levels and
see that they have very let's say very
low cortisol and some you know
functional medicine doctor or
naturopathic physician or something like
that will tell them to have adrenal
fatigue you know your adrenals are
pooped out you're not making cortisol
you need to stop exercising and
but the possible retreat for for ten
days or whatever and it turns out that
for example and highly active exercising
individual who is producing cortisol
just fine cortisol gets turned over very
quickly and you aren't going to see this
on a blood test but on a urine test you
would see high levels of cortisol
metabolites minha cortisol is being
produced just fine by the adrenal glands
but it's being cleared very quickly and
so so paying attention to the actual the
the fluids being used to to run the test
is important as well
you know so something like hormones
should be tested via urine but for the
inflammation piece you know just running
like a quarterly blood panel to see if
your inflammation is staying under
control I think would be the second most
useful measurement that is low-hanging
fruit for a lot of people in addition to
the blood glucose and then the final
would be heart rate variability you know
more about that given that we started
yes yes fully define it so heart rate
variability you know I wear for example
a ring to track it
there are wrist bands that track its
bluetooth-enabled
heart rate strap is a little bit more of
a gold standard more accurate
measurement but it is simply a
measurement of the Delta between your
heart beats you know the the inter beats
variation from heartbeat to heartbeat
which should display mild variations
from beat to beat meaning that your
vagus nerve which innervates the
sinoatrial node of the heart and
monitors or controls to a certain extent
the electrical activity of the pacemaker
cells of the heart by feeding into the
sinoatrial node that should be giving
good sympathetic fight and flight and
parasympathetic rest and digest
information to the heart and if someone
is able to control stress well is in a
relatively low state of inflammation and
a high state of health well rested etc
and has good vagal nerve tone the heart
rate variability tends to be high and I
originally became interested in heart
rate variability because is an excellent
predictor of injury and illness and
athletes meaning that if you're if
you're training a team or an individual
athlete and the heart rate
ability begins to drop typically you can
predict injury or illness about two to
three days later with surprising
accuracy and so that's a situation in
which you would adjust the training
program and give someone a rest day or a
recovery day well you know in a person
who's just tracking this for health
maintaining a high heart rate
variability and maintaining good vagal
nerve tone is one of the best things you
can do for decreasing stress for
controlling inflammation etc and the
vagus nerve itself is just fascinating I
mean it you know we were briefly
chatting about the gut brain connection
earlier and the vagus nerve is largely
responsible for that I mean it snakes
throughout the entire body it innervates
that we should just say for the
listeners that there's two very strange
things about the gut one is that it's
home to a large number of people who
sort of argue but aren't you yes exactly
in your microbiome and the other is is
that it has a very extensive nervous
system all its own which has been called
it was Gerson's title ii brain ii brain
you know the enteric nervous system and
the the efferent fibers of the vagus
nerve will feed from the central nervous
system to a wide variety of organs you
know the pancreas to control insulin the
the kidneys to control blood pressure
the liver and the gallbladder to control
bile production and detoxification and
then the afferent fibers will travel
from all of those organs including the
biome back to the brain and so there's
this constant interplay occurring
between the gut and the brain which is
why for anyone who wants to to maximize
cognitive performance you know care for
the gut is actually very important and
vice versa
for anyone who wants to limit things
like gas bloating gut motility issues
etc paying attention to the the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis the
amount of stress they said is Iginla the
HPA axis the amount of stress that
you're placing on on your central
nervous system affects digestion quite
dramatically you know that's that's why
when we have family dinners at our house
we all take a deep breath in through a
nose
through our mouth three times and we
prepare our parasympathetic system for
digestion we're activating the vagus
nerve and settling down stress from the
central nervous system which would
impact the the enteric nervous system
and when you look at research done on
vagal nerve tone there a variety of
things that tone the vagus nerve that
increased heart rate variability because
a lot of the vagus nerve travels through
some of the muscles around the throat
and the neck chanting singing gargling
so how much are religious and cultural
traditions are cryptic health programs
that we throw over at our peril
they they are indeed I mean that fasting
originally was was a religious practice
not a not a weight loss or a ketogenic
fad you know it's tied into for example
the Mediterranean diet that's the often
neglected thing that people don't bring
up when they talk about the health
impact of the Mediterranean diet is if
you look at the way that say the
Orthodox Church practices the
Mediterranean diet there's a great deal
of fasting there there are periods of
time spent in protein restriction you
know we know that catabolism and the
cellular cleanup of the what's called
the apotheosis restriction that's what
has life-extending properties and and
fasting is a big part of that diet as
well it's not just about you know
unlimited breadsticks and goat cheese
and you know oodles and oodles of
extra-virgin olive oil I mean there
there are other components of that diet
tied into the the religious aspect in
almond you know such as in in meditation
or the the breath work in yoga these
things can tone the vagus nerve cold
water the mammalian dive reflex that's
you know when a baby is first born and
in many cultures would splash cold water
in the baby's faces or for several
months dunk a baby in cold water to tone
the vagus nerve to activate digestion to
activate the building of that biome we
talked about all of these things are
wonderful for the vagus nerve breath
work and so you can you can train and
control heart rate variability and I
really like that because it's so easy to
track in real-time and I would say if
you track
glycemic variability you know
inflammation and heart rate variability
those would be those would be the three
biggest things when it comes to health
and longevity well that's very helpful
that you're narrowing it down to three
things that many people will never have
heard of or thought about right but that
are easy but the thing that I want to
get at and maybe this is a good place to
break most of us don't know how to think
about these things I can't tell you the
number of times I've been walking down
the street and somebody says well would
you look at the nerve tone on that I
mean nobody nobody talked about these
vagus nerve on that baby I don't know
that we we don't know how to think about
all of the messaging chemicals all you
know the if you ask people to break down
the body into three layers how many
people would come up with
cytology histology physiology and
anatomy we don't we don't remember all
the cranial nerves we don't can't quite
keep straight with the pancreas the
gallbladder and the liver are up to any
owners yeah but I I remember that the
the the pneumatic on a hold the
pneumatic on old Olympus is having tops
of indian and german views some hops hey
I never get it just don't ask me to name
them all yeah that's funny I hadn't
thought of that we don't know how to
think about our bodies and prioritize
these things in other words if somebody
says look I don't want to get this deep
into what it is that you're talking
about here's my time budget here's my
mental budget what can I afford to think
about without feeling lost because I
think one of the things that I find very
off-putting is that there seems to be
kind of a Rubicon either you go in for
this health thing and it becomes a large
part of what you discuss every day with
your health friends or you're sort of
frozen out on the other side of this
thing not quite sure of yourself
you know in some ways people feel the
same way about this as they feel about
mathematics they're lost mm-hmm yeah I
don't necessarily think that you need to
be immersed in the data of self
quantification I think that there is a
great deal of value if you do want to
learn about your body and do something
like a yearly comprehensive blood panel
a yearly gut panel heart rate
variability tracking measures not of
your estimation I've done some of these
things I get it back I scratch my head
somebody tells me what is something
means I start doing that thing to
rectify the situation somebody else says
well that's not what that means right
and so my question I mean here's my
ideal I'd like to get the ten sharpest
minds in the field into a room and then
ask questions and watch them Duke it out
intellectually so somebody could say
well you know that's true in general but
if you condition on this variable then
that's no longer true because that's
just part of this natural response and
it's a you know fair or not fair well
that study you know really only looked
at a very small sample that's the tricky
part is the biochemical individuality
and and Roger William I believe was back
in the sixties wrote a wrote a book that
dictated the the twelve different shapes
of a liver and a stomach and a pancreas
and the fact that some people have
extremely robust vitamin D excretion
rates and should therefore get plenty of
sunshine and perhaps even supplement
with vitamin D whereas other people
would get arterial calcification from
supplementing with vitamin D some people
have very high rates of oxalic acid and
uric acid excretion and can eat you know
nuts until the cows come home and other
people will get gout and pain in their
big toes from having a few handful of
almonds each day so it varies widely
from person to person
I mean that's the variability of the
person under study I'm saying that's
part of the whole quantified self thing
which is understanding which particular
machine you've inherited and what you
can do with it and what you can't but
then there's the other issue which is
sort of sensitivity analysis for
information that is if there is a slight
change in our understanding of something
does the prescription flip wildly or
does it move a small amount you know so
the idea and then just to to get really
into where I think a lot of these
problems go would go wrong go wrong
I want to hear many more of these things
talked about in terms of trade-offs
where well this is good for you in this
regard but probably bad for you in that
regard whereas a lot of the advice is
phrased in terms of that's a great thing
for you mm-hmm
and I just don't even believe in general
the the ketogenic diet is a perfect
example of that same or many of the
studies on its myopically focus upon
weight loss you know or sometimes upon
lipids you know your cholesterol values
when you look at a you know the
ketogenic diet that may have helped your
neighbor to lose 20 pounds you know
putting coconut oil and butter in their
coffee every morning and having you know
some kind of ketogenic fat bomb after
dinner every night
some people have for example an FTO gene
that would predispose you to very high
levels of inflammation which we talked
about earlier in response to high
amounts of saturated fat particularly
levels of saturated fat that exceed 10
percent of total daily intake of fat
which is which on a standard modern
ketogenic diet you know it's common to
eat 30 40 50 percent of your total fat
intake from saturated fat others have
familial hypercholesterolemia which
would dictate your cholesterol values
and and this would be I don't
necessarily think LDL cholesterol is is
indicative of cardiovascular risk but in
people with FH it actually is so very
rampantly high levels of cholesterol in
response to a ketogenic diet other
people have poor liver and gallbladder
function which would dictate that
they're gonna have you know horrible
bowel movements and a great deal of
digestive distress in response to that
diet but if you look at it at a
meta-analysis of ketogenic diets that
say that this is favorable for the
general population in many cases they're
looking at weight loss not inflammation
not
bowel function not not lipid panels and
so the the problem could sometimes be
the value being measured right what I'm
trying to get at is I don't see a
solution for muggles for civilians for
the average person who's not a hit high
net worth individual not a fitness geek
they want to avail themselves perhaps of
whatever the best thinking is but they
don't know what happens when people
conflict I mean like alright if I listen
to physicists or mathematicians you
could very quickly usually tell who's
talking sensibly you know they're
willing to give up well you know that's
absolutely that's technically true but
in this case bla bla bla when I listen
to health people the conversations are
usually dyadic it's usually to health
people talking to each other yeah and
with a great deal of conflict of
interest because there's a lot there's a
diet book or a supplement company
involved that right so conflict of
interest is terrible within the health
institutions
it's terrible within the Anstey anti
institutional experts as well because of
the fact that there are products on the
other side of this thing and then
there's this question that every single
biological system I've ever studied is
incredibly complicated if you look at
the Cascades you know just from one
homologous system to the next they're
totally different it's very hard to
figure out what we're talking about in
trade off space you can measure a bunch
of stuff but even there if it doesn't if
it doesn't lend itself to continuous
monitoring through a cheap device a
relatively cheap device you can be
pretty unclear as to whether or not
those values even really represent you
right and and and from one standpoint
it's a frustrating conversation because
it is such a soft
science and because there is so much
biochemical individuality at the same
time to me it's it's an exciting and
promising conversation because I believe
we're on the cusp of everything from you
know micro needling patches that can be
you know slapped on and you forgo the
trip to a laboratory you put an envelope
you mail it off and you have all the
data right there are hundreds of blood
biomarkers from the comfort of your own
home to you know i phone dongles or
anything else that can be used to
collect this data if we were to combine
that with AI or algorithms that can
actually feed through that data and
produce digestible information that's
understandable to the general public and
people can take their health into their
own hands using easy self quantification
combined with you know essentially using
using AI and algorithms which I have a
hunch you know a great deal more about
than I do I think that that is that's
the promising future of healthcare and
self-management so that we're gonna in
an energetic we're in an intermediate
state and and there are companies
working on this but I think that the
difficult piece is curating and
collecting all the laboratory
measurements that are going to give the
most useful and actionable data cuz it
can't just be you know I said like a
micro needling you know a patch that you
could you could put on your arm but we
already talked about the urine we talked
about the stool right you have to
collect more more fluid from the body
than just blood
I wasn't feeling that should be done
passively what do you mean my toilet
should be a laboratory that'd be amazing
yeah be absolutely amazing I mean if it
can have a I'm confusing can ye the cold
warm bidet hydration and and wipe your
ass for you it should be able to class
me that's to be like the Japanese
thought about all sorts of aspects my
comfort and luxury and what I really
want to know is my markers yeah and and
it shocks me that that doesn't yet exist
the ability to be able to more easily
and precisely quantify this and then
have it fed into an algorithm that will
spit out
actionable data that's easy to
understand but the fact is I should say
to my knowledge it doesn't yet exist and
I'm pretty plugged into this sector when
it comes to all the different ways out
there that one can test and the
different companies that are doing the
testing and the information they're
putting out and there's there's no
platform yet that's doing blood gut
urine saliva heart rate variability and
some of the other metrics you'd get from
a wearable device then taking that
putting it through an algorithm and then
pushing out the exact lifestyle dietary
and supplementation or medication steps
that someone could take to affect the
biomarkers that tested well another
thing that I would love to see this
couple too is some sort of a software
product that has the 15 leading health
and performance experts talking about
the same data so just the way you have
market analysts and you want to see
whether the market analysts are all
talking to each other or whether they're
disagreeing mm-hmm and then you want to
listen in on the disagreements I mean
one thing I'd love to do is to have you
back with three or four other people in
your field who if you all respect each
other and say well you know I think that
that could easily be misinterpreted or
you're taking us too far into the weeds
or I think that that study has been
given what far too much weight and yeah
and and being you know people a toyed
around with that I think you know Joe
for example has hosted a meat plant
debate yeah you know and there's some
chatter like that going on I personally
don't really use my own podcast as a
platform for for argumentation or debate
as much as exploration of ideas but
you're right it would be interesting I
think it might just lend more confusion
to the matter I don't think so I think
this is that I'm being a big Mis I think
that one of the things that I'm finding
is that the public wants to listen in on
conversations
between people who are talking almost in
tongues and then because they have the
ability to slow it down and annotate
like right now
there is a a discord server that pours
over every episode that I release of
this podcast and these guys dissect
everything that gets said they hyperlink
it mm-hmm and they teach each other
they're forming reading clubs and the
whole thing and in the audio searchable
now too
well you know Google is searching audio
I use an app called cast box it's
fantastic I use it for all my podcasts
not only because you can you know it's
got good smoothing algorithms where you
can play one two three and four times
speed and it still sounds good but I can
use the search function on that and it
will search the audio let's say I want
to learn about some random health
concept like small intestine bacterial
overgrowth I can search it'll scrape not
just the show notes in the title and the
description but the actual audio itself
and I can go directly to the time stamp
where that discussion begins and jump
right in facilities IMF depends what the
with the nature know how the fidelity
feeds into it but it's it I'm sorry
serve ability of the transcripts right
right no it's not searching the
transcription it's searching the actual
audio it's an audio search engine so if
you say something that's technical I
mean I guess I'm just confused as to how
you're saying it what I'm saying is that
let's say someone is searching for
glycemic variability a term that I've
already used two or three times and
whoever's producing the show notes for
your show or the title or the
description isn't actually typing
glycemic variability it's not scraping
by a search engine in terms of the text
that the audio is now being searched as
well and that phrase will be picked up
on the audio and display in search
results okay but it has that so view if
you put in the search as a sound and
then it's looking for some referable set
exactly but it may miss it in a highly
technical and highly technical speech I
don't know that we're there that it's a
hundred percent yeah
I don't know the level of accuracy but
I've found it to be of great utility so
leaving that aside I mean the the point
that I was trying to get at more was
just that if you had like health UFC
where experts go at it with each other
with what's the old MTV the the death
death death battle oh yeah yeah death
battle does claymation exactly exactly
well but I think that's what people want
that and they they believe in some sense
that once they can hear a group of
experts sort of handle their concerns
it's they don't have to be the one
filtering what's what's durable and
what's ephemeral what's what's a fad
what is fairly solid I think you know
that's the that's the great appeal of
listening in on an expert conversation
when you have a community that's
actually dissecting it and is able to to
do more with it yeah I think as long as
people are aware of any pre-existing
bias you know because there's from the
the investments that that expert might
be involved in to supplement companies
they might own to the the dietary books
that they wrote five years ago that
they're still married to even though
research has changed because those diet
books have served them quite well from a
monetization standpoint I mean there's
there's a lot of kind of back-end issues
you got to pay attention to but but yeah
I mean it would be interesting at least
let me do something dangerous for my own
podcast I have a few products that have
health implications that some of which
I've come to really like are you
familiar with any of these cooling
systems for mattress pads so that you
don't wake up in a pool of your own
sweat yes the the bed jet I'm familiar
with that one which uses air to cool and
then I personally use one called the
cooler my wife has one as well I don't
think it's ever been flipped on you know
returning to your your allusion to the
to the bizarre health practices that
spouses sometimes don't adopt but that's
the I think about the allure systems you
and your one you don't have to have the
same set yes yeah and
and I find it useful yeah I can set it
at 55 degrees you know I would say just
when you look at a lot of the wearables
out there one of the sleep metrics that
people struggle with the most is deep
sleep right during which a lot of the
nervous system repair and recovery is
going to take place I mean memory
consolidation and learning it or trim
too long things like that whatever
during dreaming you're in the during the
lighter REM sleep stages but deep sleep
is particularly important for recovery
and seems to be the one that people
struggle with the most and the two
things I have found an impact deep sleep
the highest are sleeping in a cool room
sleeping on a cool surface if I've done
anything to heat the body such as a
heavy meal or heavy exercise session
within three hours prior to bedtime some
kind of cold walk or cold shower
something to cool the body back down and
wearing wool socks to bed and that where
when you wear socks to bed it actually
cools the rest of the body so that and
higher dose CBD have been the two things
that have increased my deep sleep the
most so yeah I sleep on one of those
pads so that's by the way that's the
spot the one that you sleep on is my
sponsor then which I didn't mention yeah
yeah I'm still confused about whether
the calling at the chilly pad or the
Euler but it's I think they have it on
two different products yeah but that was
my favorite find of 2019 because I
didn't know and I again I liked the pad
really cool yet I like the comforter to
be really warm I don't even know what it
is that I'm interested in but it's it's
interesting because there's there's
actually a couple of interesting things
hey I think it is at Stanford that they
have researched now that cooling the
forehead is particularly helpful for
sleep latency meaning shortening the
time that takes you to fall asleep so
they've just developed this company
called
I think it's AB I'm not financially
affiliated with them at all but it's
it's a it's a headband that cools the
head as you're falling asleep and and
it's so much of the chilly paddocks if
you wear it on your head and then the
the the other piece tell me I have two
wives into this what's I do wives think
this is attractive looking no yes no on
the least
the chili pad can be set to to switch to
a warm setting at whatever time you want
to wake up so I slowly warm the bed as
you wake I haven't messed around that
function at all I just set it at 55
degrees and pass out but it's useful so
so I would say yes there's something to
the idea of sleeping on a cool surface
absolutely I remember the other thing I
was going to say is you know people talk
about sleep hygiene
you know absence of light presence of
cold a silent room right and I Lulla
right my entire bedroom is red
incandescent light bulbs because you
don't have any suppression of melatonin
levels when you flip off the lights at
night to pee or when you're getting
ready for bed at night but I think one
thing that folks neglect in sleep
hygiene is safety right this comes all
the way back to the vagus nerve an
activation of the parasympathetic
nervous system the same reason that you
would take three deep breaths and chew
your - each bite of food with pretty
high frequency if you are sleeping and
your brain is convinced you're in a safe
environment you sleep much better
you know there's why so many people
struggle with sleep when they're
traveling I have found one of the best
things aside from never having my laptop
in the bed because if my brain
associates the bed with work you get
sympathetic nervous system activation
and lack of sales our biggest fab so the
last hand bumping into the middle of a
laptop even if I'm in a small hotel room
the laptop I just don't allow it near
the bed it's always somewhere else in
the room if I want to lay on my stomach
and work at my laptop it's on the floor
but the other thing is a gravity blanket
I don't know if you've ever used the
high compression 22 25 pound like
breathable cooling gravity blankets but
what I do is I have the chilly pad
underneath me I pull this gravity
blanket over top of me and it feels like
you're just putting it it in safety it's
amazing I totally believe in this
madness is one of the best sleep acts
I've adopted over the past year okay
another one of my sponsors I'm curious I
hate mushrooms like with a vengeance and
a passion that you can scarcely believe
the one way which I can get mushrooms as
assessments as a psilocybin experience
so no college er no no
this is a experience with my parents
growing up putting things in my
spaghetti okay I don't think was
psychoactive some Yeti I actually love
this company that puts mushrooms and
coffee and tea and because I'm able to
get it and I think it has some kind of
psychological impact I can't prove it
but I believe that mushroom chemistry is
incredibly powerful are you devotee of
any of these particular I am like chaga
lion's mane and other mushrooms the the
cognitive piece I find particularly
intriguing because if you if you look at
this idea of the doctrine of signatures
it's this idea that the way that things
look in nature indicate the the
biological impact they might have on the
body so that you know those are bad so
we know that walnuts have high amounts
of choline and DHA in them and they're
good for your brain we know that that
pomegranates are good for cardiovascular
function so our tomatoes and when you
cut them open they almost look like the
ventricles in the atria of the heart you
know he's a serious man you're in County
they crack it open in a pan and you know
kind of looks like an eye and we know
that the lutein and the egg is good for
the eyes and when you see lion's mane
mushroom in nature growing it looks like
a cluster of axons and dendrites and it
turns out that it's chock-full of nerve
growth factor which is actually
wonderful for neurogenesis and
neuroplasticity in cognition and so yeah
there's there's something to be said for
for lion's mane for cognition some of
the the beta glucans and say turkey tail
have been demonstrated to be
anti-carcinogenic and anti-inflammatory
they're all those pre-workout yeah yeah
there's all sorts of interesting blends
out there so so yeah I'm a fan of I'm a
fan of mushrooms I think I think they
have a lot of utility or you could be
are you a fan of psychedelics and I'm
happy to ask the question if I should
yeah yeah I mean psilocybin particularly
when when combined with lion's mane in
small doses I'm a fan of that as a
nootropic blend
Mike
with psychedelics is that they have
become it seems of late so culturally
acceptable and also culturally
acceptable and and more and more
accessible that I think there there's
some rampant abuse going on that is now
justifiable you know whereas whatever
dropping into a k-hole or doing ecstasy
on the weekends you can now say you're
using ketamine to manage some mild
depression issues and you know using
MDMA for for some self therapy work that
you're doing for PTSD or you know you're
using LSD with with great frequency you
know many people using that as like as a
micro dose every day and the problem is
you know you look at something like like
ketamine or MDMA which people are using
a lot of its neurotoxic and if you look
at something like that was it's one of
the things that keep hearing going back
and forth the neurotoxicity that how
neurotoxic immediate it is in a trip
dose it's definitely neurotoxic I would
say a micro dose of ketamine for
something like managing mild depression
or anxiety is relatively safe but there
are people using a lot more than that I
mean I know people who are addicted to
their ketamine nasal sprays and their
their ketamine trophy's now and using
those because there was there was an
initial issue that a lot of the sort of
Schedule one treatment of some of these
drugs was so preposterous given the twin
criterion that are supposed to define
what goes on Schedule one that a high
propensity for abuse when you know LSD
is weirdly self-limiting for example and
that the high degree of harm and in fact
the I was shocked to find out that I had
been propagandized and the thing harm
had been the lethal dose of LSD is
through the roof nobody's ever found it
I think yeah i think i think the one
elephant that they were able to kill and
find a lethal dose of LSD for it turned
out that it was actually the drug they
were Co administering with the LSD some
kind of a it was some kind of a
tranquilizer or something
you want to think about the elephant
from berserk but but my concern is the
potential for neurotransmitter depletion
and imbalances due to overuse of
psychedelics well as potential for
neurotoxicity Olivia let me just clarify
the question so my guess is that we've
gone through there was an initial lie
the lie was found out to be a lie then
there was a new lie that was told by
those using the psychedelics that
effectively these are not that dangerous
that the load is quite modest and there
are ways in which that might be true and
there are ways in which that's not true
even for something where the physical
load is modest I mean I don't think we
know how we're reordering the mind even
if you don't find a strong physiological
impact of something like LSD and yeah
that that's my concern is serotonin
imbalance dopamine imbalance dependency
there there is a biological impact that
I think a lot of people do not take into
account but but you know to reply your
initial question yeah I'll I'll
microdose occasionally with psilocybin I
wrote a fiction book last year and I'd
write every Friday on a micro dose of
LSD I will what something like this for
you for LSD about 20 micrograms it's a
fairly large record I tend to have a
high tolerance yeah and on a quarterly
basis I will I will journey with my wife
actually we we do couples therapy every
quarter and our facilitator uses a
variety of different Amazonian medicines
there's always a great deal of
preparation going in a great deal of
integration going out and even then this
is actually fresh on my mind because I
have a journey coming up in in six days
I take a vitamin C I take 5-htp I take
methionine donors or methyl donors like
Sammy I use nad IVs and injections I
completely prepare my cells for the tar
example life to be honest
experience exactly and then I supplement
going out with everything I know my
neurotransmitters need to replete
themselves you know dopo mucuna and more
5-htp more vitamin C for the toxicity so
there's a great deal that I do to reduce
the biological impact that I know even a
single journey can produce this is a DMT
based journey or is this more of a
mescaline this this would be similar to
something like MDMA ayahuasca and
psilocybin over the course of you know
anywhere from 10 to 20 hours and the
eyes it would be isolating though
wouldn't it well you it's it's a similar
feeling it's not a iwasa that's being
used it's it's actually the person who
facilitates this for me they're using a
series of injections and pills that
because of legal reasons they actually
won't tell me what they're using but I
can tell you it's it's similar to the
same type of feeling as you'd get from
something like five Meo combined with
ayahuasca or MDMA or so five Meo is the
extract isolated or does their Sonoran
Desert toad yeah yeah but what concerns
me are the people doing their 38th
ayahuasca treat in some New York City
loft with their personal shaman and just
completely abusing you know in terms of
frequency of these things and not taking
them as seriously as they should what do
we do about explaining quickly to the
government that it's in everybody's
interest to stop bullshitting about
schedule one designation and to start
talking about really coming up with some
regulation that is beneficial that
recognizes the health benefits it seems
to me that we've got sort of a wrong new
culture in place around the abuse of
these things to compensate for the wrong
culture that we have at a legal level I
think Johns Hopkins and the Maps
foundation they're beginning to roll out
good research that that's actually being
paid attention to
I think academic institutions are doing
good service for that I think that the
implementation of physician is resident
why you at the same time right NYU
physician-assisted PTSD and trauma
clinics that are using ketamine or or
what
imagine pretty soon we'll be psilocybin
under physicians supervise protocols
with proper integration and and proper
medical management going in and going
out I think that that will will be
something that we see with increasing
frequency you know actual physician
overseen clinics I would think that
there's an aspect where we're expecting
the physician to step into the role that
a shaman previously inhabited and that
may be physicians aren't really they may
be more medically skilled but that a lot
of the impact is not at the level of
there's there's a need for physician
education programs absolutely I know
that a field trip which I think is
rolling out in Toronto LA in New York
over the next year they're combining
like physician education programs with
physician clinics for things like PTSD
and trauma using plant medicines or
using ketamine but yeah I think we're
gonna see this strange kind of like
hybrid physician shaman type of model
where folks are actually educated in
clinical management medically educated
but also have a working knowledge of
things like Amazonian medicines and you
know integration and you know sila Tate
as well I think the music is huge and I
think that when you look at you know I
was even toying around some apps because
I love to play handpan and guitar and
ukulele and there are cymatics apps that
you can download that will translate the
music into recognizable geometric
patterns and I think that the use of
music in conjunction with some of these
therapies can elicit almost like a
vibratory response within the cell
that's that's based on a response to
these sound frequencies that can enhance
a journey or take another stay cell you
really think there's like a cellular
level that means I think there's a
cellular level and and I'm not speaking
based on science or research or anything
like that but I suspect that we are
actually impacting ourselves with sound
frequencies and that these geometric
patterns are that that we're seeing the
you can visualize that music is
producing and you know
can app are actually occurring within
our bodies as well if you look at these
cantaloupe ends from the perspective of
frequency analysis no but I can tell you
that I feel amazing I have a hand pan
that I'm learning to play right now I
place it in my lap each night and
they're impossible to sound poorly on
because they're all tuned to a specific
scale like mine is in a B scale well the
second I can strike it anywhere and it
sounds great and it's very calming I
tried to look at this and my
understanding is is that if you think
about steel drums steel drums have that
very muddy kind of sound and that with
the hang which was sort of the great
innovation in this area coming out of
Switzerland mm-hmm
the problem is that a two dimensional
metallo phone doesn't have good harmonic
Discipline relative to a one-dimensional
media so that if you think about a flute
or if you think about a vibrating string
that you would have let's say on a
violin or a guitar the harmonics have to
sort of line up in some well-defined
fashion because of the one-dimensional
nature of the medium that's vibrating
when you have a two-dimensional medium
everything is off and what the Swiss did
was to figure out how to get enough
precision to get the two-dimensional
medium to sound at least for the first
few harmonics as if it was a
one-dimensional medium hmm I don't know
if I exactly have that right but that's
why it's it's impossible to sound bad
because you're hearing something that
effectively would never be found in
nature by just taking a metal plate and
banging on it yeah that makes sense I
was always under the impression that it
was simply the the the the tuning of the
instrument itself in that each place
where you were you strike where each of
the different locations for anyone
listening who hasn't seen a hand pen
usually there's eight or nine different
locations that you strike it's basically
all tuned to the same scale and so look
you may have a pentatonic scale or
something like that where it's hard to
find a wrong note right
you know tuned to the same route I guess
I should say you know
case B well I think you could turn to
teddy yeah oh yeah you can you can see
you can do it in 2d but when once you
buy a pan it's yeah you're buying your
hand that's tuned to a specific lens
yeah and you can't play and sound good a
pan that's tuned and B you know with
someone who's got a pan tuned to to to
see for example what can you leave my
audience with as the best way for
somebody who's not familiar with a lot
of the words that you've used or
concepts we've discussed but they're
realizing that the processed food that
they're eating might not be good for
their lipid layers they know that their
sleep is off their stress is too high
they don't know enough about physiology
anatomy to understand everything that's
being said what is the best way of
handing off from the show to somebody
who wants to enter a kind of more
mindful and intentional space and feels
unsure that they have what it takes to
digest the information and confusing
signals that are coming out of this I
have two thoughts
the first is be patient and wait when it
comes to this self quantification piece
because as we discussed I think we're in
an intermediate phase and I think it's
moving quickly and I don't think that
the frustration and confusion is going
to be around much longer as we roll out
tools that allow for easier self
quantification and interpretation of
that data for now I would pay attention
to eight things the first would be
regardless of the exercise program just
regular low level physical activity
throughout the day we know this concept
of NEET non-exercise activity
thermogenesis regardless of whether you
go to the gym just moving throughout the
day as much as possible that that's the
first thing the second would be of all
the diets that I've seen out there in
terms of good research I think one of
the best ways to eat would be some
of a relatively low carb Mediterranean
diet I think that's the one that seems
to be the best for most people because
it controls glycemic variability
introduces you to some elements of
fasting has lots of herbs spices support
of oils etc I would be out in sunlight
frequently because we know that photons
of light are very healing to the body
and there's there's this amazing new
concept of human photosynthesis and our
ability to create electrons in ATP and
response to photons of light I'm
immersed in a few books right now on
that and it's it's absolutely
fascinating in the same way I would be
outside barefoot or touching the ground
every day there's this great or this is
still three this is four okay so we have
low level physical activity we have some
kind of a low carb Mediterranean type of
eating approach exposure to sunlight
being outside barefoot or in touch with
the planet which allows for if you look
into the research on earthing or
grounding a great decrease in
inflammation and improvement in a wide
variety of health parameters you have
fingered Vibram type these are not
grounding shoes but but at going outside
barefoot bare without big rubber soled
shoes on um introduce heat and cold
we know from finnish longevity studies
for example that sweating or being hot
on a frequent basis is very good for the
body and we know that cold thermogenesis
cryotherapy cold showers things like
that are wonderful for things like
weight stability nitric oxide production
blood flow etc low level physical
activity some kind of a low carb
Mediterranean diet sunlight grounding
earthing heat cold and then finally good
clean water and minerals like a good
salt good trace liquid mineral anything
like that I would say that if you
address those eight parameters the
movement and the relatively ready to get
eight a little bit let me see if I got
it okay
alright the low level of physical
activity regardless of the exercise
pretty garlis of the exercise program a
low carb Mediterranean diet yes then
there's going to be sunlight then being
barefoot and alternating hot and cold
regime and he went in cold would be five
and six oh five and six okay
didn't realize who they're yeah and then
minerals and minerals and water minerals
in water or seven and eight yeah okay
now I got and largely and and I know
we're we're running a little short on
time but largely the idea behind those
latter six photons of light negative
ions from the surface of the earth the
movement of electrons via heat and cold
and the carrying of electrons with water
and minerals essentially treats the
human body as a battery and because each
of the cells operate on an
electrochemical gradient of a negative
charge inside and a positive charge
outside one of the best things you can
do to charge your human battery is light
earthing grounding heat cold water and
minerals so that's where I'd start all
right this is pretty intense
Ben we would love to have you come back
and potentially we'll pair you with
somebody who is more up to your level of
knowledge of the human body is the
amazing machine what we decide to call
it the deathmatch yes the portal
deathmatch well health UFC for the
moment do you have anything you'd like
to tell people so that they can come
find you and get some more wisdom if
they're hungry for more um other than
the Ben grid green field podcast I would
take it dive into my new book it's
called called boundless and you can get
it anywhere fantastic all right you've
been through the portal with Ben
Greenfield thanks for tuning in remember
to subscribe on Apple Spotify stitcher
cashbox where we listen to podcasts also
meander over to our YouTube channel and
remember to both subscribe and click
that bizarre Bell icon so that you're
notified whenever we get around to
dropping the next video episode thanks
for being with us and be well
[Music]
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]