welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
whoa it's recording he's grown in here
today hopefully going to answer one of
these questions
okay are we looking good Peter wait a
little bit more people are looking good
the world's going to hell and you all
look so beautiful
what's up with that cognitive dissonance
throwing me off my game
get this one smiling and laughing what's
up with that it's because they're at
bunny - Roy's uh it's like a technology
playground that's the only reason we're
all happy today okay um let's see
somebody answered yes grace very good
very good
noticing actually it's a tendency I have
to get more provocative more angry more
challenging over time until people can't
stand me anymore
and then it started to go so I've seem
to be on my I seem to be consistent in
that area
it works with my cohort because they
want to get their degree so they hang in
there but uh I might not be good for
late-night TV but yeah now we're going
to do actually this is kind of a we're
gonna do something quite hard today so
this is just getting us loose for that
so just start if somebody has like
something they really want to throw out
there in speech versus the chat or
somebody had any insight or something
happened to them that played off of some
of the work we've been doing that's
those are always good shares nicholas is
holding back either that he's talking to
his mom
no we're good to go okay so some people
reached out to me and kind of wanted to
what you know kind of like made some
suggestions of what we might do I know
someone I think it's Tanya keeps asking
me that I should talk about myself which
I'm not going to do but I think Peter
and I might have an interview at some
point yeah so we are gonna talk about
the dark side of meditation a little
we're gonna start getting in that a
little and we have three themes that I'm
trying to weave together today and we'll
see which one has more energy right so
okay start with three and and and we can
mash them up and then see where we want
to go and the three are is some
conversation around spiritual practices
different approaches is kind of a
critique of not necessarily the practice
themselves but the way the general
population tends to relate to these
practices some communities are more
effective than others some teachers more
serious than others but just try to talk
about some common traps that basically
people in our culture
Westerners from the abrete faiths that's
important because we tend to have a
theological orientation we we tend to
have a theological relationship to some
of the what Eastern practices it's it
seeps in into our orientation to the
work then I wanted to try to underscore
some of
they're meeting making around this
instead of just critique with some
poetry I use in it for insight practice
just kind of an alternative approach to
maybe touching base with some of these
important features of insight and I also
want to open up questions if they are in
the space about current events and since
making around current events to make
some of this practical you know I have
then have not yet spoken out about any
any of my opinions on kovat or this new
round of riots and police violence so
yeah if the energy is there we want to
go toward that use some of this towards
sense making in this space I'd be happy
to look at some questions that that you
might have part of what we've been
trying to do is some of these practices
if we were part of a community and we
had more time together they would be
practices that helped us tame our mind
so we can approach talking about current
events in a way that doesn't get sucked
into the chaos right so that you see
that every statement gets sucked in
makes more chaos gets sucked into the
chaos and this would be a kind of
approach that says no first as a
community we have to take my mind and
then we can start talking about some of
these current events let's start with a
provocative statement and the biggest
problem with try
to have spiritual instruction let's say
with with modern people let's just say
modern people is that we come to know
the teachings but we don't believe them
so we come to know and you can hear
someone pair a million times a day we're
all one and the first behavior they make
afterwards shows you they don't believe
it
this is a huge problem and people are
not called out on it
whole communities run around expressing
knowledge of many deep principles and
the first step out of the door shows you
- you don't believe it and the problem
is I think Bill Gates is working on a
vaccine for this product so the first
thing to do when you are if you're
interested in doing this work is to
touch base with what you really believe
we have to trust that it's okay to
believe that that's the problem you
enter in the spiritual community and
there's already implicit sanctions
you're already trained not to say what
you believe because you already know
that there's like this dissenters in
through these walls and this doesn't
yeah so do they not believe but not live
from that belief I'm saying it's the
same thing I'm saying that the body
believes so if the body believes okay
here's like for example let me the guy
at Burning Man that was hallucinating
and ran into the fire he truly believed
that there was there was nothing to harm
him or that that
I don't know what he was doing he truly
believed in the philosopher that says
cause and effect is an illusion doesn't
really believe it because they don't
they still careful when they drive it a
car like so belief is in what the body
does the actions show you your beliefs
and the first step is not then to try to
distort your actions into what you know
but is to settle with what you believe
to settle with what is real in your
experience and any decent teacher will
not reject that the problem is you know
that's the cost in society is like you
get shamed for these things but any
decent teacher won't reject that and
that's part of what we were talking
about last week in terms of the
contracted effects are are is material
to work with its energy to work with and
so these beliefs are energy to work with
now if you have two people in a
conversation and one person is a racist
and they know they're a racist and they
believe what they think and the other
person is thinks they're not a racist
but there's some disconnect between
their behavior and what they say or
their nonviolent then we have a formula
that's very interesting here
we have unexamined assumptions about
what we know versus what we believe so
this is an interesting beginning
okay so storytelling those a lot of
times and trying to get to understand
what we really believe things like
storytelling poetry art they unlock this
this this mind that's once to know what
we believe as if you can know what you
believe the belief is is is the bigger
it's the larger set right the knowledge
is yeah so how do we how do we look at
what is in our deep beliefs so one of
the ways to do this is through being
metacognitive we can go down that we'll
look at that a little bit and so one of
the this is just an example
it's a simplistic overly simplistic
example so one of the ways knowledge and
belief works is like we like this let's
say you saw
a picture I saw it's actually I think on
the internet so a picture with a child's
face on the ground with a boot on its
neck then you zoom out you see he's got
his hand in the boot right and you can
say you have another different whole
frame right then you zoom out you see
there's a person holding a gun to the
child so he puts his hand in the boot
and takes the photo op with the boot on
his neck
now you switched again right then use
your mom you see there's a bunch of
camera people and it's actually an
action shot for a movie
now you've switched again we can go on
and on and this is something the month
then the knowledge mine does its beliefs
keep reframing the perceptual experience
to fit the belief and you can do this in
your own head or you can just serve
social media to find frames that slide
get more or less adapt to your to your
beliefs
so I'm gonna read a poem that talks
about this it's not a story but we
congregate around ideas like ants to a
drop of syrup not knowing that the
forces of adhesion can do us in but
somewhere inside this not knowing is a
fear that prevents us from moving too
close and drowning there in the sweet
taste of certainty therefore like the
ants we set about in a swirl around the
thing that has gathered us in a shape
that mimics the Milky Way under the hot
Sun the syrup runs and small streams of
sweet knowing stick to our feet and we
are forced to lick them clean or forever
be held in place when the chill of
evening a glutton eise's us but the
memory of that sweet taste the brain in
its servants adhered to for a long long
time and therefore when the SAP runs
once again and seeps upon the ground the
ants will show up regardless of the
weather to worship their
so one thing about a poem like this is
it shows you it's kind of humbling
because even in the realm of ideas I
mean I think I take it literally in the
realm of ideas we are reenacting
something very fundamental and basic
about how life is it's fundamental and
basic this notion of understanding
ourselves in this compassionate way
understanding how you know we two are
like the ants we two are moving toward
things with both desire and fear we too
can get trapped these are very important
things to us but we have to understand
that this is part of our existential
being it's part of what it's very
similar to the processes we see in
nature we can we need to approach this
with that kind of compassion the folly
of the ants all they love this era and
yet got called and now they're stuck
this is interesting about people even
the shape we take around these is like a
circle like the spiraling finally
spiraling thing to see this and this
light is to it's a different kind of
framing it's not like the framing I just
told with the boy with the boo which is
like one story frame it's kind of like
gets down tries to get down to its some
level we are made like this that's okay
and then we can explore potentials for
transformation
anybody have a comment just noticing the
taste of a different approach at
different the you know we were working
with perception and the perception
noticing noticing in the way things are
is the way we are and not getting so
carried away with how sophisticated it
is in content
and it builds compassion for the living
world I once had this huge insight with
an ant I was sitting on the toilet as
you do and I was lingering for some
reason it was at the other house it was
a tiny house and we had a lot of dogs
and I was looking down and I saw this
ant trying to make its way across the
floor and there's like it got caught up
in a tangle of dog hair
right so for the ant to get from here
that this you know like 8 inches later
or three inches later it had to go up
this hair and down and it had to like go
through this and like there was and he
was just a you know a happy little like
he was just negotiating that that and he
makes it to the other side and I felt
like I felt that the sense of that of
being on the other side of that and then
I had this crazy insight like all of a
sudden I had this mental model because I
thought you know the ants I mean it
didn't come like in sequential it just
was all at once and I thought the ant
has no idea that that whole journey he
had it was just a piece of hairball on a
floor in a toilet you know in a bathroom
and a little cabin in Northwest
Connecticut in a country on a planet in
a solar system in a world like the
distance between the ant and my
perspective I just got this huge head ah
but then I realized that there
is that much difference between my
perspective and reality also and that
was the insight the Indian at the
stomach humility some people call it
that's the insight so the frame the zoom
level in which you address these
questions is important now I'm not
saying that the zoom level at the
highest possible imaginary is
appropriate to all these things that's
like you know the spiritual person who
nothing you know it's all it's all Lila
okay not saying that that's the response
you should take the question is at what
level since you're going to frame
something anyways where's the leverage
point in this where is the leverage
point in politics today to left-right
discourse I don't think so I think
that's he needs a zoom out where's the
leverage in your spirituality today
maybe that needs a real dive deep in
right so this is part of the when you're
trying to know something or inquire a
big part of what's operating and your
mental model or is this virtual point of
reference this virtual frame of
reference from which you are asking the
question
and so this is a level of conversation
that is sophisticated but I think that
we as communities need to be working on
because it's a skill it's like having a
lot of tools in your toolbox and do you
want to use the microscope or the
telescope or the oscilloscope I mean
what is the appropriate frame of
reference inertial frame what is what is
the position that you are speaking from
I mean I read one other poem and then
talk about systems thinking okay that's
an interesting question that's part of
it
pray deeper seeing the frame you choose
will be dependent on what you think you
want to do right it should be tied to it
should be transparent to your beliefs
and your choice or your action and then
you're looking for what frame has the
biggest the greatest leverage point this
makes me think of a story I was actually
going to tell this story how many people
saw the movie the there was a remake
with Jodie Foster and Yul Brenner I
think there's an earlier version of The
King and I I think it's called the King
and I and it's the story of this kind of
naive young British woman who gets a job
teaching the King of Siam his children
Western you know English Western
languages and Western science Oh Anne in
the king Anna the king
thank you I know I've made that mistake
before
and so there's an interesting scene
where the people are going to stone this
woman to death for light I don't know
silly reason you know like I don't even
think she cheated on her husband she
just didn't want to get married or
something or maybe she I don't know
something like that and Anna and the
King have a very complex relationship
that they're like in love on a deep
level and they're very respectful and so
when this is happening she goes to him
he says you have to stop it you have to
stop it and he he does it and she can't
figure out why he won't go out and
forbid this woman from being stoned and
then eventually Anna and he tells Anna
no that's not how it works you know I
mean this is kind of bastardizing it's
really a beautiful movie but he's but
the King goes is that if he goes out and
says stop it the population will know
that he's adopted Western values and now
he's becoming a dictator on it right and
so he believes he doesn't say this to
her she doesn't quite get why he's not
stopping it because she's grown to
really admire and love him and they
share a lot of common Western values and
so he he spends all night praying and
the mob is getting more and more you
know riled up and the day of stoning to
death is coming and then she goes down
to try to stop it and that ignites it
right away and they stoned the woman to
death and so the king is working with at
the level of reality of the you know
trying to leverage trust that the energy
will blow out that the people will
resolve it he prays all night and he
tries to leverage the natural
evolutionary potential in the system
because he knows the opposite will make
it worse right and
then Anna is horrified because she
realizes that she basically was the
cause of the woman being being stoned to
death so this is I don't know why all
these things fit in the same thing it's
kind of like the king has a perspective
on people like we just had on the ants
and the syrup there's something there's
something there's potential in what we
have to work with and there's potential
in what we actually believe even if
quote-unquote I know better yeah these
things don't don't they don't line up to
an easy conclusion but I think you're
getting the sense of a space that were
working with now
okay I'm gonna read another another poem
it shows kind of the opposite instead of
like this notion of being sucked into
something that sweet certainty and being
kind of adhered to it this is a kind of
an opposite sentiment it's also
potential in in the human exhibit human
condition the path has no entrance and
no exit still I find myself here on it
the self has no entrance and no exit
still the path is shaped into becoming
when the owl soars there is no sound
the air spreads out before him releasing
space increasing speed a world in motion
appears where does this world begin
where does this world end having no path
is no possibility in the mind of a
walker be like deer and follow what is
not there
having no path is no possibility in the
mind of a walker be like dear and follow
what is not there it's kind of a :
some ponderous faces and something
smiles right so this is not something
it's not telling you something you can
know I think that's maybe why time your
Nathan are smiling if you feel your
mental processes like yeah we can force
something in there that's when we're
following I mean it's kind of a
constitution then we're following a path
yeah yeah Sean is this is this kind of
related to finding out what you truly
believe by I guess I want to relate this
to something that I've been reading the
way to love describes not being able to
change yourself but rather to understand
in trying to dive into like what you are
and like what you believe having the
awareness I give I guess like give rise
to the nature that actually oh this is
really hard to talk about but um I think
it's hmm there being a no path is sort
of related to not being able to change
yourself and having the awareness of
your nature sort of give rise to
whatever happens afterwards I don't know
if he could talk around that at all yeah
or someone maybe somebody else can riff
off of that I mean you know it's a rich
poem so there's different nuances in it
and I'm remembering something that now
Bateson said right now she's at one
point she said she just found herself in
the middle of things and like I'm this
thing like this like energy seem to be
gathering or like just in a situation
and she's just and she said she just
didn't exist yeah that's against a good
sense of no entrance and no exit like we
constantly are framing our experience in
where did it begin in where did it ends
and what's the trajectory and what's the
path so that's that's the mind of a
walker and that's okay we have to
there's what many times we have to walk
you know the sudden it reminds me of
Inception that's kind of where one of
the ways he describes how she can tell
whether she's in the dream is because
all the sudden you're just in the
experience and you can't you don't know
how you got there
and then what are you following I mean
you're following what's not there that's
kind of literal but for some reason I
thought of those scenes because she's
very playful he gets very nervous
because she's so playful with her
newfound reality
anybody else for me what comes up is the
sense that you know when you're sort of
following a rhythm or a tune that only
you hear from the outside to someone it
looks like you're falling apart but when
you're walking through that you're sort
of just going with the fella sense of
the rhythm and it may look like that for
you once you sort of finish your life
and you look back on it and like okay
some dots might connect but in the
moment when you're in it doesn't feel
like a part yeah so just a couple of
levels of depth in there I will start
with where you're at
yes but we also have a tendency to be
the outsider thinking we're following a
path right as we're walking so we can we
can play that role in our own mind and
so now here's the curse the deep one
there is no felt sense to follow the
felt sense in the action is the felt
sense in this step is the same it's one
gesture
that you think the felt sense comes
first and you follow it is the same
framing much more subtle as that you're
looking at yourself and thinking there's
a path or someone's looking at yours
thinking there's a path so that's the
that's a that's a that's a deep fraying
that's a very zoom in frame the others
are zoom out frames right because you're
walking and then you're retrospectively
connecting the dots as if you can watch
yourself
and make a story and or you're thinking
of a person doing that those are all
zoom out frames but if you look really
closely the felt sense and that gesture
are the are the same in this case a
gesture being the step metaphorically
now you get the sense of following
what's not there
their share example please and it makes
me think of sometimes when I want to
write something and I'm thinking okay
I've got to write this thing I'm like I
don't know what it is I haven't got my
book out yet um and I never never get to
it but then I'm like okay but just get
my book out and I'm just just go and
then it starts start flowing when I'm in
that process then I know if you just
like looking from the outside thinking
and trying to put out this path whatever
thing I'm gonna write then it just
doesn't really yeah it doesn't emotion
yeah and again we started by saying you
know what is what is a useful zoom to be
in and uh same thing for me writing I
have to go in and out all the time like
tries to be crazy like throw enough rain
going here alright that's not work you
know so there's some kind of constant
dynamic but it is it is to notice not
only that there are different frames but
that you can cultivate other other
friends yeah we're on zoom huh that's
interesting yeah I hear you there
you know I worked for a long time in
landscape design build and the frame of
being having a systemic mind and seeing
when the resources here on this day and
just then we can bring the crane in and
you know this was like coordinating all
that dynamically was fun and and and
that's a certain frame but some people
ran their companies and with Gantt
charts and milestones and they were too
locked in inflexible so this kind of
complicated their stuff so there's
always so this is like you know we're
investigating how this thing works and
part of this is this notion of framing
and zooming and tension between
potential tension between knowing and
believing yeah those are you know
integral theory we can map it out this
way so all the perspectives the
perspectives can live all the
perspectives can live in one frame right
so you can have as you could zoom out
and have a first second or third person
perspective from that vantage point well
then you can zoom in sometimes when you
zoom very very far in the perspectival
dimension can get smaller there I subtle
but this is a different this is like a
depth the zoom dimension to the
perspectival map so more of a
metacognitive function
okay if you don't follow the felt sense
what is the appropriate relationship to
it that's an appropriate relationship
you're just you're just reconstructing
there may be a little gap between the
felt sense and what you do or they may
not be in the fact that you are
languaging that way you think there's a
gap but if you look really closely and
you work with this the gap the subtler
and subtler distance between the fallow
and the felt sense you will get very
close to like spontaneous action or
something so it's just it's just dialing
into em when there's no gap between the
felt sense in the and the gesture I'm
I'm just gonna fall out like I'm Aiman
I've got to try and do the thing right
now just because you you started off
asking the question like of or saying
that we've come to know the teachings
without believing them and and that we
have to the first step is to just be
with what it is that we believe and so
I'm wondering if this felt sense the
airtime that is actually kind of like
it's connected to that believing it's
like and it it's that thing that wants
to move somewhere and so if you don't if
you can't even be with it then we can't
sense our own movement yeah so that so
the felt sense is in the direction of
what you actually believe but you don't
an easier way to that I mean for real
subtle stuff yes but another way to do
that is what does your body do does your
body do that's what you really believe
at that level so you can believe all
kinds of crazy things in the spiritual
world or I would say no that's how we're
using that but your body doesn't seem to
acquiesce to those those truths and so
actually one could say this is just
throwing it out there that the gap
between what you believe and what you
think is suffering can you expand them
that if that was obviously very
interesting yeah so your body lives in
the real world
whatever that means just very I don't
mean it in a big-deal way you know it's
like you have to eat you have to
you fall down something happens there
there are single-loop consequences and
if you think otherwise and you act by
those other thoughts you will suffer
like most people well now we're playing
with the words think and believe I think
we understand how we talk we're talking
about it like the body kind of believes
it's gonna die the body believes it gets
old we often call it and thoughts that
don't agree with that so much
but in that framing it almost feels like
we are almost slaves to the body
Beneatha are you are you familiar with
Katherine's bio motive framework you
know I still haven't Daniel Thorsen's
watch party and I know that though they
were kind of like talking about its
usefulness and I haven't looked at it
but that came on my radar just last week
yeah he's he's on today I think and
doing an intro to it and he yeah he
talks about the the animal kind of body
brain yeah intellectual brain and then
the emotional brain and how they don't
talk to each other very well because
they developed at different stages of
evolution and then the week we were
meeting to kind of get them talking to
each other and this feels what you're
talking about it feels really like it's
it's touching in with yeah because yeah
but what's interesting just to bring
that in you know what was very
interesting with Daniel is what people
very you know he made the New York Times
like you know it goes away for 75 days
in the cabin it's not that extraordinary
but we are all very but it was the
timing because of coronavirus right
and he comes out and one of the biggest
thing he said is this relationship to
the body was completely changed
he I mean we had I think before he went
in you could say this subtle framing
that were enslaved by the body and he
comes out and he realizes that all
pleasure all joy all perception like it
comes from the body there's a big mind
 that that's one of the framing that
we have subtly you know like suddenly
yeah the mind has convinced you it's
immortal and so it blames the body for
containing it
it's the primary act of violence your
body has an existential precarity which
means you do and so does everyone else
um I just thought I would share an
anecdote that I think is funny and kind
of ties into the conversation I during
this call like experienced a big wave of
nausea from a type of medication that I
don't always have to take and sometimes
I take it wrong and I took it wrong and
so I got this big wave of nausea and it
was just very funny so you have to turn
off my camera and like kind of tune out
of the conversation a little bit and be
like yeah well actually I have a body
and it's precarious and I have to attend
to it and I can't be fully in my mind
space and I just thought it was like oh
I can't maybe hear everything that's
being said but I think I've got a
transmission going it's really practical
in education you know we teach children
as if you know as Zack Stein is really
good at analyzing it as if we're
designing Minds the body is completely
shackled and the things that yeah and so
we actually you know that's the signal
that were given
it's just uh it's just how we are as
moderns I guess okay so I'm just gonna
will end can i end with one more poem so
this poem is a poem about how we order
things like we implicitly we know like
how we judge things and our biases and
Prejudice but we're talking about deeper
metacognitive patterns and how we're
always ordering things in our head
despite the perceptual evidence to the
contrary and it's kind of a so lighter
poem but it was written after an
experience I had watching the snapping
turtle eat a duck so that's most of
these are prompted by actual experiences
I've had so I saw a snapping turtle
snatch a duck in the water pulled her
down down down to her turtles lair and
devoured her this upset the order of
things in my head the reptile who
catches birds is a Jurassic creature yet
the reptiles were masters of the
universe back then until they were
brought down down down by a big rock
upsetting their order of things
it was from the sky the asteroid came
obeying in transient laws as dead things
do having one purpose only to fall down
down down the consequences of which was
a cosmic accident just like when the
algae walked out of the sea up up onto
the surface and built a sky of oxygen
killing every living thing but making
way for both the turtle and the duck and
ordering things what do I know well the
ending come for us from below or above
to create a new order of things from
this happy accident okay
Peter our exit we need to thank you
again for another psycho technology
playground are we coming back next week
checking in each week so next week come
back for another psycho technology
playground same channel same time we
have a real Beck coming in for
collective presencing 12:00 p.m. Eastern
Time and we also have Doug Kathryn
Dennis I pronounce his name from what
was just mentioned by a motive framework
maybe you've taken that when you came to
Toronto could you maybe give us a
preview of what we can expect yeah
definitely has like a really long
history a background in like Western
clinical psychology and like traditional
meditation practice and stuff like that
and a big area
that he saw missing in people's like
psycho technology work kits was the
emotional clearing out he finds that a
lot of people are running into the same
distortions of reality that come from
like these emotional wounds even though
they've maybe been meditating very
diligently for a very long time and so
his bio emotive framework helps people
identify core feelings and separate them
out from social feelings and then update
the the beliefs that are going to those
feelings so that they can process
emotions fully and move on and and have
actually like fully experiment some
things with body and shaping their view
of the world anymore he's also just like
the sweetest guy ever like even just to
like have an hour of his company on his
you call would be a good enough reason
to come by but you will also learn a lot
about your emotional system thanks maybe
you know that's at 4 p.m. Eastern times
60 minutes could be 90 minutes it's not
to talk about that we just posted event
called travel perilous and I'll read you
the description it's Rebecca Fox she's
part of the whole kind of a skeptic
atheist community and so topic perilous
is a place where we train ourselves to
dissolve the barriers between us and
them to think flexibly about our own
identities and to get comfortable with
uncertainty we use playful exercises
draw from Socratic dialogue meditative
practices and occultism and hopefully
emerge as radical agnostic scape above
bearing witness to our own personal
crisis of meaning well it's gonna be
juicy and we're gonna like look at
different models and phrases from all
these magnetic tribes like you know all
white people are racist or always
matters or even more kind of
controversial ones we're just trying to
try to look at it and body it and see
what emerges so that's this Sunday I
think at 12 p.m. Eastern Time
yes alright so thank you I'll be walking
I will
thanks everybody thanks Bonnie don't you
stop recording there we go