hello everybody so i am i will introduce
paul at a moment but for some
housekeeping so the main thing that i do
which is help run the circling institute
and teach courses encircling our main
the main thing i do the art of circling
which is our year-long training starts
in March so if you've been looking at it
and you haven't contacted us yet please
do that soon and although just go to our
website there's a link for artists
circle link down there and if you're
interested in working with me one on one
and again for coaching or consulting
please email me and my emails down there
as well
okay so Paul this was just such a such a
rich conversation I like I really had a
lot of Paul's just great he's a he's a
pasture and he is his open-mindedness is
incredibly amazing and his heart is so
deep and I think as you listen to this
video he you at least what was revealed
to me in the video was just how deep his
heart goes and how he lives his life in
the wisdom I really felt the wisdom
the wisdom of it kept coming into
appearance for me and impacting me so
this is so I left this conversation just
so moved and opened and my mind was open
my heart was opened I felt deeply close
with him and I would say nourishing in
the sense that that I feel really in
touch humbly with life but in a way that
I feel inspired to engage with it even
deeper what more could you want
right it's I think it's a little under a
two hour conversation there's lots of
different moments in it right at the end
the last I'd say 30 minutes
I may even I may even like edit it and
just put out the last 30 minutes because
it's a moment of really of exquisiteness
exquisite depth that I experienced so
just so you know there's lots of
different phases through it and I hope
you enjoy all of it all right thank you
so much well have you been I've been
really really
I've been how have I been well I guess
I've been pretty good cuz I don't
exactly have an immediate answer to that
question so I mean I did through
personally it's been a combination of
some really like awesome things going on
and some tragic things going on bunch of
deaths that hit pretty close to like
more than like really close to home that
especially for my wife and and for me as
well um while like we just bought a
house in Alameda and which is really
awesome
I don't it's a really sweet spot
it feels really right my wife my
relationship with my wife is just keeps
being so like so something I've never
had before that I keep being absolutely
struck by
there's some to this marriage thing yeah
there is being growing up you know in a
this kind of secular humanism I've I
kind of think I where I come from is a
very I just implicitly question any
social norms in any structure sits just
like been part of my part of my upright
I don't even know if it's been part of
my upbringing it feels like it's part of
the ethos or even the air to just to be
suspicious of any of that and I'm as I
get older and especially through
marriage I'm starting to really realize
in a in kind of a profound personal way
the wisdom of it in a way that you can't
in what I'm realizing is that you can't
you can't it's one of those it's one of
those kind of like an existential truth
like you can know about an existential
truth you can even talk about it but
like until you actually get it in
experience and that is the truth is the
experience of it right and I I think I'm
really feeling that in a deep way my
wife and I both right in a very very
deep way that is is changing me yeah
having me it's having me having me
really that all of the structures that
go into the background like occur to me
a lot more and I'm like whoa how many
thousands of lives and cultures who have
like just to make that building just eat
like all of that like so much wisdom and
it's been really cool to find myself
being someone that notices that and
appreciates it so what what about so I
know my parents my parents my
grandparents my parents stayed together
until my father died my grandparents is
very little divorced in the
part of that because you know both
families you know very religious strong
communal bonds reinforcing marriage and
it didn't mean that divorce was
non-existent
it was just unusual it was it usually
only happened if there was an
exceptional situation so so what so what
about marriage do you notice it would
that be part of the part of the crazy
thing about you know working on a lot of
this stuff is you just begin to realize
how much there is built into things that
we don't even think about so what what
aspect of marriage are you recognizing
is it this I mean because part of
marriage is the is the stuckness of it
and it's it's something larger it's it's
its resistance to the will because I've
been married you know how many years
I've been married now 31 it'll be 32
years this year yeah and you know there
are there there are it is not uncommon
for many married people to at some point
in the marriage often many points in the
marriage sometimes years of the marriage
want to get out yeah and yeah I remember
when I was before I was married a pastor
that was sort of a mentor of mine
recommended a book on marriage that
basically said you know there's two
rules don't leave and learn to forgive
and obviously they're connected but well
that's how I would say that that that's
one of the things that was really clear
to me is when we because I've been with
Brienne my my wife for the better part
of going on ten years and we actually
got married about less than a year and a
half ago
and so there was there was a period
where like we had we had broken up for
about a year a little over equip a
little under a year and a half and then
we got back together and that was really
a big and I think about the first four
and a half years and then when we got
back together they're very very
different worlds and what's interesting
is I think everybody that knows us what
like could could see that that we've
always really like had a lot of ecstatic
love for each other like that we really
like each other
like and there's this kind of you
there's always been that but what's
interesting is I think what I thought is
that that it's that ecstatic kind of
love and liking of each other
that was the key to having a
relationship and making a relationship
work and what's interesting is we had
that and that's not that they had almost
had nothing it did something didn't have
anything to do with it it didn't it
didn't provide a relationship right and
we still have that but having it in this
kind of container right that has a
history and like has been really it's
it's it's it were flourishing at a new
level and what's interesting for me I
think and I think this is partly has to
do was just being guy right is because
I've never I also think some of it has
to do this is my first experience of
what I what I think in psychology they
call secure attachment I just never had
it you know like we talked a little bit
about my background before um I like
both my parents are awesome but you know
like addiction and all cut all the
instability and all that so I didn't
even I didn't even know
even know how to experience that now
there's something about marriage that
does Wed at a level that I think is very
linked to what they call secure
attachment I don't think they're
identical but I think they're really
close and what's interesting for me is
my it there's the experience of being
with Brianne in our marriage but then
there's my ex my relationship to the
world of how it's really changed like
the world shows up for me different and
because there's something that there's
something I feel like this it's like
well if I look at my life is like a
mandala right it's it's kind of like I
think what I always thought was supposed
to be at the center of the mandala was
something like freedom right and
but I didn't realize that what ended up
being at the center of gita' was not
freedom but the obsession with
preserving it on some level and I think
the sat like the sacrifices felt like is
like really actually giving up this
guarding of my individual freedom on
some level right and a lot of that had
to do personally with with them like
some deep distrust and betrayals that I
had experienced right that I didn't even
know was affecting my view of that how I
related to that but when at at some
point there was an experience and a lot
of us had to do with how breanne really
shifted in her relationship with me
where
I was able to unfreeze and go oh this is
there's this one place this is the one
place in the universe where I relate to
it differently than anywhere else right
like Oh something hurts everything stops
and that completely matters and we have
a bond everything that comes first and I
just never experienced that but when I
started to experience that it was like
in a different universe and what it did
is it felt like it took the right thing
in a quilt in the center of the medulla
and then it was like an ontological
chiropractic shift that it went up from
the center I was like oh this is this is
this is this is that marriage thing
there's like there's something to that
right
and I I it's had me think a lot about
like the conversations like that we had
and that we've been having of like the
larger picture of this because on one
level there's like guy and his
particular psychology playing out but in
another level there's like what he's
inside of right and what what his inside
of his inside of that also contributed
to this being possible and I look at you
know I look at how marriage is he was
50% divorce rate and something huge is
shifting
it's definitely already shifted and it's
had me think a lot about
a lot about all that stuff you know just
threw it through my experience too you
know it's you know there's a lot you
know not only among Christians among
people who are exploring other other
faiths and other practices there's a lot
of talk about you know becoming less
egoic moving off the ego I mean marriage
is some of these traditional
institutions marriage Parenthood these
are these are these are radical brutal
practices two of what in Christian
theological terms we would call
mortification yeah and the you know it's
people people when they're in an
aspirational mode say oh I just want to
be less egoic okay well why don't you
try why don't you try wedding your life
to another broken selfish human being
and talk to me in a few years let's see
how that goes
yeah because because I love the way you
you just you just put it together there
because you begin to realize that yeah I
am I am way way more selfish way more
self righteous you know when it when it
comes right down to it I'm finally all
about me and it more that more than
anything else and the and and
understandably so in the kind of world
that were in but to then say okay I'm
going to lay that down for the welfare
of another well what will that mean
will I be hurt yes
will I be taken advantage of probably
more than once will will will it be fair
uh probably not especially in my own
eyes
and and so that sort of that sort of
laying down one's life for the sake of
another who may or may not be worthy of
your life yeah this is a this is a this
is a radical practice that has been
participated within you know millions
and millions of times over yeah bringing
joy bringing sadness bringing loss you
know and and part of you know I'm
unconvinced that a good you know a good
bit of the meaning crisis has everything
to do with our affluence and the our
achievements of building a society in
which the will full volition is king and
you know I've I've had many
conversations with people who you know
they they went to school they got a job
they did all of this and it wasn't until
that child came into the world that oh I
you know the love the love of another
binds me yeah and and at in ways that on
one hand in some moments I desperately
wish to be free of but at the same time
never dare to loosen and you know this
is that that's something that that
marriage that's something that marriage
will teach you I'm appreciating a couple
of things I'm appreciating you
describing what occurs to me is the
wisdom right like I hear the wisdom of
of not only your knowledge of it but
your knowledge of it right like I hear
that I yeah I can hear that the
understanding of the trials right and
then the commitment through it was
recognition about it being transcendent
in
way I'm subordinate in a way that even
if I doesn't feel like a choice I would
still choose it back that kind of deep
yeah it meant um and the humbleness
around it that's I think that's what I'm
appreciating like there's just something
bigger than us around it and I actually
not that I'm talking about him like
that's actually the feeling I'm having I
feel very like experientially humbled by
this process you know by this thing and
I think some and some level is kind of
cool because you know I it's it's a
little bit like somebody I ran into
somebody today that had this kind of
enlightening experience right and in how
he how he got there was he that he died
and was resuscitated and he experienced
this whole experience of being an infant
coming into like coming into maturity
gaining language like as he came back
however he went through it with an adult
ability to understand it hmm right huh
and that was that's kind of like what
opened him up and in some ways this is
what I kind of feel about this it's like
oh wow I think I think at one point this
happened just to be a lot more embedded
in the background practices that you
just did and it was experience but not
explicitly in a process of development
that was implicit within the in the
cultural structures um and I kind of
feel like oh whoa I'm like I get to be
you know watch my own development from a
fetus right through something but with
the cognitive capacity to track it and
to somewhat understand what and be
conscious of at the same time I think
that's what you're hearing is like my
inspiration of like what I'm learning
about a little bit about reality right
through my experience of this it's
really exciting yeah yeah it is and talk
about self transcendence to have you
know have
because when we all passed through those
stages you know we couldn't self
transcend and I you know Irene I have a
memory of myself I don't I was still so
for a while I was my bedroom Shh
was the same room as my father's study
and then then we fixed up a room up in
the attic and then I moved up there but
but I was but I was still in my father's
study and I remember I remember a moment
of seeming a seeming self transcendence
when I you know saw myself at that
moment through different eyes and had a
sense of my own agency you know and and
for you know obviously being raised in a
deeply Christian home you know God is is
obviously talked about that word God is
is always present but you know I've been
just doing so much thinking about this
word God and and what what we what we
mean by it and how it is used in our
language
I mean similar to you know similar to
marriage and that when you know I was at
a meet up once and I I asked the group
at the meetup I said why don't we give
our marriages names and they wondered
about that
and I said no if you if you if you stop
for a moment and consider your marriage
if you gave it a name and at least a
degree of personification yeah well what
would you name it yeah and how would you
relate to it
because in a marriage you very much have
yourself your partner and the marriage
and the marriage becomes a a third
valued entity right there and so you
don't just do things for your partner
you do things for the marriage and so it
becomes this you know it really becomes
this
right you're as such but it's not a you
know it's it's not a thing like the the
cell phone stand or my jacket I'm taking
off what kind of a thing is it
yes it's or is it closer to you know I
know you're you're super into Heidegger
is it what you know is it closer to
being because the the marriage that you
and your wife have is yeah language is
so hard with this stuff totally it's
definitely a presence yes like in fact
we we went to this is what happens a lot
these days as well well we'll go through
something like well something will
happen and then we'll interact around it
and then afterwards you would be like
wait a minute
they used to just threaten the whole
farm like and it's it's thought it like
when we look at each other's it's not
like individually I'm somehow more
mature like it doesn't fit she's more
mature it but if we've even used this
language of like yeah it seems like
almost our marriage is more mature than
both of us right and that there is a
sense of an awareness of that there's
yeah there's something that there's
something that we're tending to that's
more important than the argument that we
would have or there's something like
that and it really is I'm watching it
organizer life you know in a way that I
think that's really true it it does a
feel like it feels like a prick like it
yeah you're right it does have a
presence to it um that has a it has in
some ways it has like I think a little
bit of like you know a top down but it
also has an inspirational quality to it
right there's like it uh it's like it
cut yeah you're right it's like there's
a kind of feminine task aspect to it and
there's a masculine aspect to it
[Music]
it's it very much liked it very much has
taken over my conscience right like yeah
very much so very much it's that's the
world is a strange place and but and and
it's you know and then I'd be curious to
know because I you know again being you
know raised in a deeply Christian place
why my wife was a Christian so you know
we didn't live together until we married
you know all of that usual stuff so I
don't have the experience I mean I have
the experience of having a relationship
with the woman who would become my wife
before we were married but I I I don't
have this sort of you know you know
living together sharing a bed all of
that without the marriage and then with
the marriage so I'd be curious to know
what you've learned in that process
well here's the thing is if I were to
look at it right so in many ways I've
been fumble my way into this
right I've been in some ways I tripped
into it like and we happen to stumble in
it and fought and we found it right but
through
if I had a choice between doing that and
having it be I honestly having it be
part of the implicit sense of things
honestly I would choose the other right
you switch the the one the one that you
more experience oh okay okay of like
where it's just kind of built into
things and your individuality is shaped
inside of the of that like that seems
because most of the time people don't
like what the thing that I'm noticing is
that people don't actually trip into it
they trip over a cliff oftentimes right
literally and I do I did as me really
think about like I I this it really is
hard to comprehend the huge change with
birth control right because I do
encounter a lot of in my work up like a
lot of women especially right who are
experiencing so like men that just don't
just will not like won't commit or don't
want to commit and their anxiety in the
face of that and the way that they're
anxious like makes the guy go away
there's nothing there's nothing actually
kind of like gravitationally taking hold
that makes something like a marriage on
on a rational level make any sense right
it's just like what you talked about
like and I I don't know the answer to it
I I feel um I don't know if it's
marriage I don't know if it's reassuring
pressed by to the limited degree I can
see things from my own perspective of
just really recently the whole game has
changed but
such a way that it's not apparent how
strange it is and how different it is
that's the thing that's sealed in the
matter right like just in my lifetime my
lifetime I look at this is like that I
grew up before the it like you know
before the Generation X right so I'm one
I think I'm the last generation that has
a memory before the Internet and that's
gotten more and more meaningful right is
that was on I'm like realizing what a
drastic huge thing that is on every like
on on levels that are so far beyond my
comprehension but I can just sense it
you know is I remember when I grew up
there was a implicit sense that like
you'll live your life and you will out
in the process of living your life will
meet somebody right and you'll meet
somebody and you'll get married and
because on some level you look around
and that's the story of most every other
person right - in like that that was
this that that's basically what would
happen right except you know it's more
conservative areas that I'm sure and
like more liberal areas but like for the
most part that was it - where literally
what what the story is now is you go on
a dating site and you go basically on
interviews and that you read you there's
a sense of like who are you compatible
with ray and you match that up um and
it's this very interesting compelling to
me
that is completely it's not only a
different process but it's a different
understanding about what itself is and
what another is and what a relationship
it's an optimist and ontological
histological transformation that is so
weird it happened so quick like within a
few years it just went that direction
because I think one of the things I'm
finding out with this is that what what
dating sites in them in them in the
context that that arises from doesn't
take into account is it's not like
there's me who has a a set of
characteristics and then there's you
that as a set of characteristics that
then they are either compatible or not
it doesn't take account that like if we
engage into a relationship to the degree
myself will be constituted and by that
relationship right that's the part that
like seems to be not seen or accounted
for or related with in many ways however
like people's nervous systems still need
it
do you haven't told their nervous system
you haven't told their attachment system
they haven't told their like we're still
like the the the biological you know
organism with all the layers of
consciousness and finitude and all of
that that we've always been however the
frame that we have for making sense of
it seems to be so much more flattened
and dare I say tech like we just kind of
more and more I think heaven like a
our sense of everything that is is is
more of a technological understanding
where we look at the world and we don't
see a future we see a thing to optimize
right we don't see like a potential or
Talos or something to aspire it's more
like there's something here and let's
just extract out as much as we can from
it and I when you look at dating sites
and my understanding of how that's all
like relationships are starting to be
viewed as that way as well yes it's like
it's so weird yeah yeah well yeah I
think look at it's weird
yeah well it's you know people are
against the objectification of people
well yeah that's what exactly what a
dating site is for you objectify people
and and you also in a sense you tear
them from so you know I put a video
today on so my wife and I and my
daughter who's living with us right now
we we kind of ran through the good place
you know because you can stream at all
and so just a matter of weeks when went
through the whole thing you know the
individualism before obviously before
300 years ago marriage was the domain of
families trying to afford their children
you know not necessarily happiness but
survivability with you know because
marriages were about not so much about
emotional attachment but much more about
contractual arrangements business so on
and so forth and then of course progeny
and continuing to family throughout
history well you know that that of
course radically changed and there are a
number of good books out there that
talked about that shift and so then so
then we sort of went into this posture
of well hopefully by the time a person
is 16 or 18 or 20 they will have been
formed sufficiently by the family that
the formation will do its own thing
be expressed in the choice of the person
and and off you go
and so for example in in my tradition
you go let's say to the Christian
college that your parents go to and
you'll probably find someone else who
has had an upbringing similar to your
own
you have enough commonality that you'll
get a good match and you know whole many
things will be sustained and carried
through by this process yes okay now we
do it on the Internet based on a low
resolution image and something like a
Facebook profile and you know talk about
relevance realization and a salience
hierarchy and and so I mean this has it
was very interesting because after I
started making videos about Jordan
Peterson started the meet up who came to
the meet up mostly young single men
usually because they didn't really get
into this until they started getting
into their 20s so usually between 25 and
40 we've got some girl a little bit
older and this issue came to the fore
very quickly and that was interesting Oh
interesting and and a lot of that I
think had to do because Jordan was
setting out a message an aspirational
message pointing to something that
people understand that were attracted to
yeah and and that attraction was her own
you know in a sense a romantic hero
journey from the male side that you
should you should lay down your life for
a woman and a family that you know you
should lay down your future in a
commitment yeah and it's going to be
costly yeah and but that is a that is a
heroic thing that you can aspire towards
right right and and that you know I
think that's that's built within a Khan
text that says that obviously has values
all over the place
that says you as a an individual defined
by your skin are not the be-all and
end-all of what this thing that you are
is for you are for something else you
are for someone else you are for another
their whole community and there is no
more noble greater thing than you can do
than to sacrifice yourself for that
other thing
it's a future it's a community it's you
know it's you don't necessarily put your
finger on it but you can sort of sense
it pulling you into the future yes and
and that of course is in competition
with all of the all of the urges and
desires and appetites we have that our
commercial society has found profitable
to indulge and amplify yeah in our midst
so it's so it's you know Jordan sort of
you know struck that chord and a lot of
a lot of young men began to say I would
rather I I think I would rather live
that life you know where do I start
because they they have a sense that this
isn't something they can do on their own
their their their will their desire
their intention is insufficient to
actually give them a future of pursuing
this this vision yeah and and that you
know so at at our last meet of actually
one of our members you know announced
that he was engaged he was engaged to
his girlfriend and he he said you know
this meet up being with you all has been
an important part of taking that step
you
and and I you know I thought that was a
I thought that was a beautiful beautiful
thing now what would it for you like
what did it feel like what was it like
being you hearing him say that like
having having sourcing being a part of
big influence to that being in a space
such that you got to hear that and you
had something to do with at least him
getting getting that like what was that
like what was that like for you it's
always well as a pastor because in a
sense what you are is the custodian of a
tradition and a community yeah it's
always both gratifying because it says
that I haven't labored in vain yeah it's
also terrifying because the you know you
know full well that you know as then as
a minister often you do then sometimes
go off and marry you know perform the
ceremony for these people yeah and then
maybe a few years later you'll be
sitting with one or both of them right
and they get to the point of you know
this person that they've pledged undying
love for you know they're probably the
the most likely person they would you
know commit murder on I mean marriage is
that way passions are up and you know
very few people kill people they are
indifferent towards and so it's
gratifying but it's it's tempered and
sobered by by a lot of experience yeah
so what I'm hearing is that basically
you heard it from inside on some levels
to being wedded to that person for a
long time like being a minister is it
fair to say of being a minister in some
way is being married to
walks into your church therefore when
you support make possible like guide
open up say has the implications of a
lot of that something that you're
already committed to being therefore
into witnessing yeah and then sharing in
the responsibilities of where these
things go yeah because you know pastor
you said if I would marry it would be a
good thing and my marriage hasn't been a
good thing okay
yeah what how do you metabolize that
like what's what's the ride like what's
the ride like when you have heard that
or when you've heard something like that
or at least felt like that was the case
like what's that like for you well well
I anybody there I have a mostly older
congregation so I don't do that many
weddings but people are sometimes in
shock at the weddings I do do because a
lot of Ministers you know want to go out
and and laud the you know the the joys
that will come and well usually when the
joys come people don't need any but the
joy is its own is its own reward I
usually I usually remind them that that
vows are for doing what you know you
should do but desperately don't want to
do and whereas when you know the people
are looking their best when they're you
know in the midst of infatuation or the
the first bloom of love those things are
very easy the reason you are surrounded
by family and friends hopefully is that
when you go to your friends and say I
can't stand him he's an asshole and I've
been working on him for 10 years and
he's never going to never going to
change
community comes around and yeah he is an
asshole and he may not change but you
know you've got you've got a few little
riders on that on that project that you
started and we're going to encourage you
along the way I mean that that's the the
terror of binding yourself to another
person is the uncertainty of the future
you you you take a degree of certainty
and and you mix it with all the natural
uncertainty that is there and and so
then as a as a pastor you spend a lot of
time sympathizing listening encouraging
yeah as counselors know to you try to
very seldom give direct advice partly
because it's pointless yeah but what you
tend to try to do is help them help them
see better and process and because what
anything that they're going to see
they're going to have to see themselves
and so as a conversation partner you're
sort of a midwife and you you take what
they have and you might twist it and but
that's but that's the goal right but as
a as a pastor you're you're complicit in
the tradition that you're stewarding
usually for better and for worse and and
you bear that when you embrace a
tradition that bearing like that bearing
because I was just thinking about like
wow it sounds like the role of a
minister it's really quite intense as
I'm as you're describing to it I'm like
kind of crawling inside of it and just
kind of getting it
one level you're like you're basically
saying alright if you walk in to this
church like I buy is it fair to say by
being a minister I is it I don't want
the word sacrifice but like ice
I sacrifice my preference right and I'm
already in a certain sense wedded right
to the personal walking in and that
wedded miss is what Mike I have an
unconditional commitment to that but
then when I heard you say is you don't
even get to argue with them or tell them
what to do hey you can't tell them what
to do it's pointless then you learn that
yeah yeah but there's this but there's
like that your your sense of your sense
of what you get to do is is is listen
and Midwife right and yet but it's
interesting to think about like most
midwife's they come and you know the
baby comes and then they like I think
about midwifing is they become pregnant
with the baby the second time right and
then they and that but they get to hand
the baby back off stay there for a
little bit and then go home you're like
alright I don't know what I'm gonna give
birth to but and then I then I'm with
them yeah I'm with them I well your
Midwife of you know before I you know
start at any of this yeah in in us in a
secular fairly materialist culture as a
certain article there's a Andrew root is
a he's just been writing some books
about pastoring and it he doesn't know
any of the discussions we're having in
our little corner it would basically be
pastoring in in a postmodern meaning
crisis that's what he's talking about
because in many ways with Galileo this
the this
status and stock that clergy have had in
the public sphere and an individual
individuals lives have been falling you
know pretty steadily all along yeah I
remember there was one situation in
which there was an individual in this
church that had been a-been and
alcoholic he was raised in the church
and so would you know what's going to be
into the in the church until the day he
died not a particularly moral man not a
particularly good man had a real problem
with alcohol but deeply because of how
he was raised and when and where he was
raised deeply committed to the church
and I remember things in his marriage
had gotten to a point where there just
needed to be an intervention and so you
know I went to his house his wife was
doing her codependent things you know I
sent her to her room and I told him I
said you know if you don't get yourself
to a 12-step program I'm gonna put you
under discipline and that you know that
was enough and I can count times like
that on one hand in ministry that the
amount of authority remains in the
institution in our time and place what
happens mostly is that when people hear
what they don't want to hear they simply
leave which means that church has had
for centuries churches had been sort of
a larger communal marriage in which
there was a commitment to the community
and the kinds of goods that you've
recognized in marriage were similarly
afforded just like with marriage not
without downside it's not without abuse
not without all those things that happen
amongst human beings but those those
privileges and and and outcomes were
afforded by the broader community and
that the pastor and the clergy class was
in many ways stewards of that and those
days are gone in many respects
and well yeah there's less abuse of some
of the kinds of abuse that we saw
pastors do but there's other losses
which are not quite so easy to recognize
right and I think some of the losses I
think is a little bit of what we touched
on right um just these changes that
we're talking about I mean because I
know a big part of a big part of even
the sense of I'm gonna meet somebody in
my life and we're gonna get married
because they all were like on some level
that's all like been intimately involved
with Christianity in the church I really
appreciated the EM one of the things
that you said and unfortunately I like
you I don't I don't have time to watch
all your videos but I like try I try to
watch as many as I can and there is one
make me really like this before you know
it's like the hand I think you're
referring to the you know the atheists
argument right is like the hand does
everything that the hand does and then
but doesn't acknowledge its its
connection to the arm I was like that's
really it's really a great way of
putting it
I'm curious with your circling because
yeah I mean there's no tradition around
that and so I would imagine people drop
in they have a great time they say oh
guy this was transformative this was
really cool and they're gone yeah that
happens for sure that happens for sure I
mean the you know my what my my desire
now here's the thing is I think that in
Iams
with the circling method you know what
it really does is it on some level it's
about it's it's very much about like
okay let's draw an outline of the things
that make something like deep intimacy
and like profound conversations and
connections happen like lists what are
the constraints on someone and so we're
gonna get together and we're just gonna
sit inside of those constraints and
notice when we're not and then come back
and and then just tolerate that uhm the
thing I really don't want is I don't
want people to I want them to use that
in their lives
great I don't I don't like I don't I
don't think I want to promote
I don't think personally I'm not
inspired by you know having intimacy
without friendships like which which is
possible to actually have right so it's
like for me I've always really um it's
been it's been like no it's just like
when you do yoga right like you're not
doing yoga most of the time to get good
at Yoga it's what it's a if you get good
at Yoga when you're walking around the
world not thinking about yoga your
baseline is just more open you have a
better relationship with gravity right
your and that's that that's the way that
I really see circling is it's it can be
really transformative right and it has
huge impacts on relationships and I want
them to like take this and go and have
relationships and I do think it is
responding and this is the circling
Institute I I see us responding in a way
that's happened in some ways on its own
because it's been as much listening to
what's going on that is tough that that
it's circling and the world has informed
each other and mutually shaped each
other and I I think it is addressing
well if you just look at it I think this
is the first time in history
we're all you pretty much need is an
internet connection right and a room and
you can literally you can connect with a
billion people you could start a
business you come on you can become a
millionaire you can start a company
right you can claim to have 10,000
friends you have your everything
delivered to you right without ever
having to talk to another person now if
you think about and now it that has not
been that long that were we've had the
option to exchange information um before
you always had to do this awkward thing
that's scary as hell right called facing
another human being and the big vat of
everything they are and the big vat of
everything you are and tolerate the
coordination and the possibilities
there's nothing about that that's
comfortable right like think about how
long it takes for you to become
comfortable with somebody where you can
just sit there and not have to talk or
do anything those are really special
relationships right it take time like
learning how to live with you know nine
million strangers is so unusual for us
right because if you think about it like
if you go before civilization I was
thinking about this the other day well
it's like what would have it been like
to where like you have a hundred people
that you're hanging out with hunter and
gathering and that everybody that you
know you've known your whole life and
everyone that they know they've known
their whole life there's everyone there
you've gone through all of this stuff
and that's been the whole history that's
gonna be the whole future in a man and I
imagine what would be the experience of
somebody not in your clan like it's like
I would imagine it was just absolutely
terrifying threatening other
just incredible now like we all live
together yet we have the same nervous
system so how we dealt with that well I
think we dealt with it through social
norms like etiquette in all these micro
movements that no one knows how they
know right right like is handshakes and
in social organization and think about
what that it basically all of that on
some level is connected to being scared
shitless of another human being yeah if
they're not in your tribe you want to
kill them or run right um hey uh tur
utter utter panic yeah to being able to
be in a place where we can walk down the
street and we can say hi right that's
intense
like that's really really intense I
think something worthy of deep respect
[Laughter]
yeah yeah yeah right well my wife is a
is a Waldorf teacher and so they start
at first grade they go up to eighth
grade and this year she's gone from
eighth grade back down to first grade
and you know so then so you know she has
the the grieving of losing the eighth
graders because they very much were her
kids for eight years and then you don't
realize what a group of first graders do
and don't know can and can't do yeah and
you you realize exactly what you said
that you know in a sense just like we
can imagine all you need is a room and
electricity and a computer and an
internet connection the world beyond
that you know and and that's that's
simply how we are and not you know a
hundred and fifty years you know not
very long ago in the Americas there were
most people living well know in these
tiny little groups degrees of network so
on and so forth the
it's it's truly amazing it's truly
amazing we're doing as well as we're
doing yeah when you think about it it's
stunning it's stunning like that we can
find a way to like I can look at
somebody and we can make eye contact and
that could go well right and that being
said right there's also this other way
where were designed to be around
familiar people and to be in contact and
get like this like it's really strange
if you think about you think about how
important touches and I think it's
important in primary because there's
touches also a communication right and
it's in and what it is is it's almost
like a pure confirming communication
right this notion of like you know when
I directly address you like even if I
don't agree with you I am in my address
I'm claiming your existence and
acknowledging it right touch is really
like that right when I've gone but now
what's what's interesting is when I I've
really gotten its sense of this one I've
gone and been hired by a family where
sometimes what I'll do is I'll I'll go
into a family that's struggling and I'll
the way I'll work sometimes is I'll go
and basically move in with them for a
couple weeks and then just and I have
kind of I think I have a proclivity with
losing the guest in the house feel what
you need to do so they so they get to do
their thing and they're not warming or
anything
yeah and just work with the family as it
families so I've learned so much from
that I can imagine yeah but there was
like what the there was one family that
was just so isolated from each other
right they this notion of having your
own room as a value right and actually
as a status symbol
right
range when you really think about it
from this level right and so everyone
ever in this particular family everyone
was so isolated from each other in an
extreme way I could never catch them in
so the dynamic was was played out in
their distance right we're with some of
the other families they were more on top
of each other and like we do a lot of
work and the in the car right and work
out these things and so then what we had
to do is is I had to I basically had to
work out with his dad like I was like
okay let's let's unplug the back of the
house and say that the power went down
and PG&E had to come which forced
everybody out of the rooms into the
living room which of course forced the
conversation that everyone when it was
like not having you know that was really
like that kind of stuff yeah but
engaging in those and actually ended up
that actually ended up like really
transforming the family it brought a lot
of things up in it it wasn't yeah it
didn't lead to a fix but it actually led
to things actually completing that were
bad got worse but having to deal with it
right yeah and I just my sense is is
that we live in a time where that having
to deal with everything that it takes
that traditionally is how we form an
identity is in those interactions and
being an other for others right and all
of the micro and the macro sense of that
which is so integral almost synonymous
with becoming an agent in an arena yeah
we have more and more options to not
have to do that and I was talking to
somebody who had taken our course a
couple weekends ago and they have a
couple kids and they were just she was
beside herself talking about her kids
she's like yeah somebody the FedEx
person rang the doorbell in the kids
were terrified just to answer the door
right yeah and here's the thing it's the
terror right isn't isn't the issue it's
that it's an it because it's always been
terrifying right but what's the issue is
we have more in more ways of not having
to face the terror because it's not
necessary and I think that division is
happen so quickly on such a short amount
of time that we have no idea how that's
actually affecting us right now it's
changing our self understanding our
sense of ontology like what is or isn't
important our sense of identity when I
feel into kids like teenagers they
there's a there's a level which would I
feel into them I'm like whatever it is
that when you kind of like whatever it
is that tells you you or you whatever
you touch it on that has you go oh this
is me when I wake up in the morning dear
it's a very different thing that they're
touching then I don't know exactly what
it is it seems a lot more distributed
and it seems a lot more lateral
in what they call real is very different
like and I'm just it's it's this is why
I really appreciate Heidegger when he's
talking about the age of technology as
not being about technological advices
but what it's expressing is a very very
very very different and deep
understanding of being it has a
particular characteristic that the it's
an understanding that in its
understanding um
hides its totalizing power right and
that is kind of you notice that with
technology is these epic breakthroughs
happen that are normalized within two
days and no one notices them and then
everyone lives inside of them and then
they're shaped by the thing that they're
living inside of and then they don't
really even track any of it so there's a
and I I the one of the things I've
appreciated about your videos is I've
always felt with you right this um
recognized I think a particular tone us
right about about basically being for us
in our view of where we are in history
we're like an ant in a on top of an
elephant that there's an ant we can only
like see this much in front of us that
like there is it contrasted to a lot of
what I'm hearing about which kind of I
think has this presupposition that we we
can actually just change history or we
can just change we can develop a
strategy and have a different
ontological understanding in fact we can
go to the grocery store and like take
your pick would you like to do which at
some level seems to be I've always been
like like wait a minute
I don't even know what the hell I am
right there's a certain I think on
awareness that feels implicit and
explicit in you that like honors the
fact that like there's so much going on
that we can't see and
I don't in fact what it is to be human
is to not be transparent to ourselves
right
like in that kind of sense of respect
for there's of greater movement going on
right that like it's not the kind of
thing that can be because we can get
clear about right and an act on there's
something about that that I've really
appreciated that about you is it is that
kind of an understanding it just seems
like a wisdom
of a particular way of standing at all
of this that I feel I just always
interpreted that in what you were saying
or felt that from you and appreciate it
a lot well thank you yeah I am regularly
astounded at how adaptable human beings
are I mean it is you know when I compare
us to my dog or my cat or you know any
you know this whole idea of I mean
you're just you're describing a home in
which people are you know they're
disconnected cuz they're living in their
little boxes and they're living on their
little screens and you would not have
been invited into that home unless and
until some member somewhere in their
social system said something is
seriously wrong to the degree that they
let a total stranger move into their
house that that itself is an astounding
thing yeah and and to think about the
fact that you know I was talking to my
adult Sunday School class last week and
saying you know a Roman Baths didn't
have all these little square cubicles
where people would have privacy yeah a
Roman toilet didn't have you know little
one Cedars yeah and in the ancient world
people you know bathed together they
relieved themselves together when they
were um you know fornicating or in the
marriage bed it was you know slaves and
children and I mean the the privacy of
our present world yeah would simply be
unknowable yeah you know this is part of
the reason I've really appreciated the
image that Bret Weinstein has in that
you know yes we are we have the we have
these genetics and and that level to us
but this other level is you cannot have
a human being without having this other
level yeah and and that the the
diversity
you know how deep that diversity goes
when you see it is is simply
breathtaking right um right and and so
to me well how would you know how would
you how would you represent such a thing
well well it gets rid gets represented
in a sense in in humanism which comes
from Christianity and you know I don't
know about other traditions but that
that we are made in the image of God we
are you know we are these we are these
godlike beings that at the same time are
so frail and so ridiculous and so um you
know stupidly capable of of utter folly
and you know I'm so that's how we are
you know and you know I've so
appreciated you know John's emphasis on
wisdom institutions because you know we
don't even know what wisdom is and and
it takes it takes so long to learn and
you know it's it's it's a life as we
live it today is both the most
astoundingly at least for many of us who
live in the developed world in places
like California
you know how unbelievable our fortune to
live in such a time and place to live as
we do I mean it's just it's it's just an
outsized miracle of which you know we
can take so little credit ourselves for
it yeah yeah yeah you know everything
else and I think so yeah it's like
wisdom it seems to be the more that you
have it the more you realize you aren't
like it's one of those things where it's
not something inside a human possession
no no right and that's what's a little
bit scary about this kind of how this
techno and framing
optimizing sensibility is that it's it's
really about like kind of extracting
resources or or something that in like
the least amount of time it takes the
least l'amour collapses distances we
just implicitly value it right
see it's for me too I'm like I'm of that
you're on that we are the even
comprehensive right this is what is this
is kind of interesting that so these
things with conversations there's
something different about it I think
that captures my imagination but I think
one of the things that inside of that
kind of technological frame that it
doesn't seem to acknowledge as valid is
what it is I think where much of wisdom
comes from which has this experience of
like actually going through a period of
time and being a fool right in having
the consequences of foolishness and then
learning about reality and realize like
oh this struggle to realize a potential
that at the end you realize that what
you were after was that wasn't what you
thought it was and like all the things
that are all about not collapsing
distances but actually um in some ways
paradoxically having distance become the
thing that shapes your character right
and even the notion apparently like what
I've been hearing lately that like the
notion of character
doesn't make sense for the current
generation like they just don't have the
notion of it like this idea of of like
that you go through something right and
that you struggle with something and and
then out of that struggle is how you're
shaped and that develops over time which
of course links very much with wisdom
and in that whole conversation that they
don't live in a reality where that just
doesn't occur for them as an ideal or as
an option or as attractive um
and I've seen that you know even in the
change in in watching my son's education
I remember in school homework and your
grades and things you know it was a
struggle and you did it and
but it seems it seems like the current
educational system is it's all about
these kind of tests that they take that
they can like it's more if as long as
they pass these tests which are usually
measure something something that's like
based on intelligence basically like not
necessarily what you've worked for right
if they pass all these tests may ace all
these tests that's what matters and the
actual schoolwork and their grades don't
matter
that's all happened in a very short
amount of time
that's very radical shift so even there
it's kind of like you think about the
view of the education system of how is
it in order to have it show up that way
what do you see
people as you see them as resources yeah
to optimize like if you have a talent in
math or a high IQ like like sir make
sure you don't die let's get you in the
right thing and make sure you take
advantage there's all this anxiety and
this fragile miss around it um because I
think in some ways it's almost like
we've lost a whole nother dimension and
again I'm you know I think you can
probably hear my voice that I'm scared
about that stuff I think it but it's
also really fascinating and interesting
and I have no idea if this is just a
part of a an evolution up that I can't
even grasp or understand but I'm just
really present to the uncanny nests and
the those things that we used to call
home or no longer intelligible to be
there right in these deep ways that I
think the strangest thing is for me
anyways that's
I've been noticing is is is that no
one's walking around like very few
people are walking around going isn't
this weird right so I feel on some level
I think that's one of the ways I'm
personally responding to it is like
really there's something there's
something innately important for me
anyways I just by watching my behavior
yeah it's like Heep is just to keep
revealing and seeing what is most
concealed which is how weird today on
some level I wonder if if there wasn't
more you know that you mentioned earlier
I mean we plenty of studies about this
and Church studies people don't realize
how how much churches have been studied
and study themselves and you know the
idea that you can really maintain a
face-to-face relationship at varying
degrees with about 200 people that's
that's it's it's a function of time and
space emotional energy all that people
have different bad wits within that so
on and so forth we you know we we do
live in a time and space when when there
has been such radical change in many
ways technology has disrupted
institutions patterns of being the the
the prevalent ought to improve that
lives so we're trying to make schools
better we're trying to make housing
better we're trying to make life better
all without all that amazingly weak
grasp on what on earth we mean and know
as better and so we try things and then
a certain after a certain point the
number of people say was that better
right oh I don't know kinda how was it
worse how was it better and you know
round and round and on and on it would
it would be interesting to
- you know get together with other
parents but again part of it is I mean
you and I both live in urban areas in
California astounding diversity of many
many kinds but it's in in many ways you
know the world for many people just
seems so it's just simply too big yeah
totally totally and and so something
with something as important to you is
the the education of your child well you
know you you have this sort of you have
this sort of trust that well I'll just
let it go
unless and until I see something that
you know that triggers me and then I'll
act and because and and how many of how
many things in our life aren't like that
yeah because we're you know we're busy
down here we've got a highway you know
here's here's the marriage here's the
Parenthood here's the neighbor the
neighborliness here's the relationships
at work here's the relationships in the
third space and on and on and on and
kids got to go to school keep the lights
on keep food coming in all kinds of
other things well time it be healthy
food what's happening in the formation
of the child I mean just and and again
in and and it's not hard to to see
because you can you can visit places of
slower speeds in the country and in the
world where you find these people have
always lived together yeah family units
are intact everyone knows each other and
and you see you can kind of fly in there
if you have significant enough
relationships and you can see okay
well boy there's some there's some real
treasures there there's also some real
bindings there yeah some of those
bindings don't impinge upon me but also
there's some poverty's and I lack some
of those treasures
so right totally you know it's I think
about this like on some level you know I
hear oh you know one of the things one
of the few things Heidegger says in you
know of course he he talks about the
world of philosophy as not you know you
lose philosophy if you demand results
from it right it's like he's just not
it's something else if you're doing that
was philosophy so he's he's always been
pretty at least in my mind or how I read
him you're gonna read him without me
especially hi Jesus you know I don't
know if he thinks he says anything right
but what he doesn't say is can be really
really impactful at least for me but one
of the things he said about like how to
respond right to the technological age
in essentially I think what he meant is
but like an age in which we've lost any
sense of home
alright that's uncanny down one level is
uncanny which means weird but then
there's uncanny NIT which means like the
lack of home formula home homeless right
which makes everything weird right so
this kind of like sense of deep
familiarity that's as you're talking
about like as the as it's linked to less
and less our home you know just become
someplace in the suburbs or we don't
know our neighbor ray um but what he
said is like in the saving in the danger
is the saving power and what I take that
to mean I don't know if I understand it
fully
but in some ways I think I think what
I'm watching in in the conversations
about the meaning crisis I think is
actually and I think John would agree is
is there in fact just me John and who I
think it one of the most in my view the
most um hi daguerreian Heidegger
professor right you really is the real
deal we're gonna we're gonna have a
three-way and talk about this
specifically we I think that's one of
the reasons why it's so present to me as
we just tend I did we just scheduled I'm
really excited about that
but in many ways I think the meaning
crisis is very very much addressing what
he means by the age of technology in the
sense that sense of history and the
numbness and the nihilism that moves
around it and
but what I think he meant was that it's
on one level what he meant is a little
bit like what we were talking about we
don't produce history I don't think we
produce history right like I don't I I
don't it's not an object of my
production I'm of time I'm corporal
through and through before I have
anything to say about it right so
there's to piss in the wind of history
is doesn't make any sense
right but it's in our response to it and
I I think he would say something about
like what one is to really see it like
really see it and in a certain sense
respond to it in a way that where you
can possibly through the gift of the
Gods right could develop it beyond
itself right that there's something
there's a deep intelligibility in here
right in an in that it's a in that it's
the movement of the understanding of
being right is something that faith in
is what I hear however how do we have
faith right what is it to be in faith
and to respond to it in such a way that
in my response I invite on some way
maybe even beyond my like beyond a point
that I can see in my own lifetime but in
some way that develops the understanding
beyond itself right I don't know what
that what the answer is like when I
asked myself how I get kind of a little
bit blank however it does seem to be one
of the things about about the circling
method and what we what we teach and
train is like it's like I look at that
I'm like oh yeah this is it's there is a
sense of where what we're talking about
is like well what would happen if we
just kind of came home together right
here like if somebody's going through
something like how do we respond and how
we hear that that we're actually being
with what is without fixing it without
judging it without but actually just
like okay if you're suffering like let's
just be with it
right like I'll suffer with you right
and this is what it's like and in fact
there is a sense in which it seems like
that there's something still available
in I bow in the I Val encounter that
seems still available to me and I sense
it too in you and your sense of
compassion and what what you walk with I
would imagine in ways that are so
implicit to you you don't even notice it
but it really does stand out and I just
want to let you know I really have
appreciated your your continuous
compassion and like your the courage the
courage to completely explore in all
these conversations that I think like
would look like would look threatening
to explore I think too many but it seems
like you keep turning towards it and are
open open to it well again thank you
that's that's very kind
you know I it's I mean that we're home
you know and and what else you said the
you know we don't produce history I
think in some ways that I mean both
those concepts swing back into marriage
where we started this conversation
because in in a sense in a sense what we
do when we marry is we express an
aspirational agency towards creating
creating home and you know that is
obviously the context in which in which
children come into this world you want
your you very much want your child to
have a sense of have a sense of home and
and and again you know we we we don't
produce history but there's a there's an
interesting relationship between that
and home you know toll Keane obviously
and his you know in The Hobbit when you
know Bilbo Tolkien on one hand very much
as the hobbit hole is home yeah and yet
Bilbo must leave home yes no there and
back again
and and you know
one of the things so it you know I I
think a lot about we have this we have
obviously have this longing for home
this is deeply built into a lot of
church church language we have a you
know home is identified with with you
know what comes after death often you
know the the technology as as destroy I
mean that family that invited you to
live with them in order to address a
malady they couldn't name you know they
were they were looking for home yeah and
they had a sense that that you could
help them and he even look at these
spatial metaphors were using had a sense
that that you could help them find home
even though they're you know clearly
living in their house and and if if
asked to sit down and describe just what
home is while all of us would be
hard-pressed we might be able to offer
up some adjectives that are evocative we
might be able to offer some word
pictures that trigger in us memories and
and visions of home but you know one
that one of the things that that CS
Lewis talks about in the beginning of
mere christianity with his argument
argument from desire is that we all have
a longing and a sense for this this
really and I mean and even home I mean
again the being we have a sense for
being because it's all of the it's the
whole thing you know it's in Christian
terms the language is consummation yeah
which is obviously connected to a couple
consummating of
marriage and in the book of Revelation
it's the consummation of Christ and the
bride
it's the consummation of heaven and
earth
it's the consummation and and and
there's we don't you know Lois points
out we don't get there here and now yeah
we taste it and and Lois notes that that
the the tasting of it is spread
liberally in that it's the some of the
best meals I ever had were in some of
the poorest most remarkable remote
communities you could imagine where you
know usually women would sit by a
charcoal fire and work on a meal of some
fish and some rice and a few seasonings
they could get together and that meal
would be cooked over the three or four
hours we had in the church service and
then you come out and you know and you
think wow so these people who have so
little at least they get to share in
this joy yeah and yeah and and so that
then and this is part of the reason that
I you know will you'll pry you can try
to you know I'm not giving up my hope of
heaven I'm not giving up my hope of home
because yeah you know even the even just
the even the hoping for it yeah is is a
participation yeah in home and and often
be closest I can get in this space and
time where all of us feel it's um all of
us miss it just oh I'm really
appreciating kind of like as your as you
I feel like I just took a walk with you
right so as I was as the process of
understanding what you're just saying
I felt like on some level I had to
actually recognize what you were saying
in a certain sense I just felt really I
appreciated the way that you just
expressed that and I I noticed that what
comes up for me when you say that is
like he will use the year that the word
yearned for home hmm a yearning is to me
seems to always kind of Connaught ate
that and like a yearning in some sense
is it usually kind of evokes something
that you can't get like an object you
can't possess you yearn for God or you
yearn for something transcendent
therefore on some level the yearning
itself is its announcement right it's
like it so in other words it's like this
very I felt like on one level this it's
a very intimate thing to yearn for
something and it and it announced I
think it probably displays a little bit
of the nature of what home is because
there's something um in Rilke uh in the
first dueño eulogies um the first one
where he's talking about like he says he
said something like this is like even in
the warm animals gaze mm-hmm right it
knows we are not at home in our
interpreted world and I and I think that
what I just heard him that like that
went through my mind what I heard in
that is like actually so much of home
this for us right is so wedded to this
the that home needs to be something that
we're constantly yearning for but in the
yearning means that there's something
ungettable yet the thing we're yearning
for is inherently ungettable so it's
kind of like there is that quality I
know in a conversation
my friend mark the other day we were
talking about like he's like you know I
think we've been in the meeting crisis
from day one what you're saying it's
like oh yeah like me it's and I think
what I what I what I heard and that is a
little bit of what your talk I think but
what you're saying - it has me look at
the way that your time having it talk to
me I'm recognizing as a lot like a lot
more at my own center of this sense of
the though that to what it is to be
human is to be the being that is a
question right to be alive is to be in
trouble on some level already okay like
it's there is there in on some level
it's not we're not we're not given home
like an object where I think in a I can
imagine in an animals kind of way of
being that they're not yearning for a
home right it on some level they're
satiated their instincts are all there
there's there's a it's a very very
different sense for us because we can't
ever attain it right it's what we yearn
for but the yearning for and responding
sensitively to that right seems to be
the enactment of home but implicit is it
is a homelessness um so so there's it's
interesting when I think if I take that
and I kind of take up your the way that
you talked about you know the best meals
that you ever had like I wanted to sink
into that for because I heard I've heard
that thing before and I wanna but I
heard it nearly somehow what is it what
do you think's going on about that that
on some level these people that are poor
have less security yet you you can go in
and have a meal with them and feel more
at home then right when you're in the
city or something yeah yeah yeah what is
that what is yeah like I'm just curious
what is it that what is it's going on
there that what's the difference that
makes that difference you think it's
hard it's hard to know yeah you know I
have this with I have this with the
homeless ironically you know I have
ongoing relationships with a number of
people who are homeless and I I I will
often I will often think about them when
I am on a cold night doesn't get that
cold in Sacramento you know only in the
30s a cold night and I am in bed and I
am thinking about them and I don't know
I don't know I don't you know I I think
there was just always something in the
meals shared with the Haitians which
because I at least comparatively so was
so much wealthier than they were that
they my father when you know my father
came down to the dr a few times and he
loved going out to the churches with me
and so you know of course you know
there's all here there's your father and
so do everything to keep the yeah
praises on him of just a young kid and
you know they said in front of us this
big plate of rice and my father's you
know digging in to eat though I said dad
don't eat the whole thing was like why I
said because you know what you leave
others will eat and so you know eat
enough to eat enough to demonstrate your
gratitude and your appreciation for the
fact that these people these people who
struggle to feed their children have
just placed an enormous heaping plate of
food in front of you yeah and and and
everything that goes into that yeah and
and you know why the another another
another thing CS Lewis right
about thatis that has impressed me
deeply yes this essay which you can find
online about equality and he writes
about the specific pleasure of the
inferior hmm which is something that we
is very unamerican because we don't like
to imagine there is an inferior and if
there is an inferior it must be banished
hmm somehow as if we can do that but the
specific pleasure of an inferior which
is you know the dog feeling the
gratification of of satisfying its
master yeah and you know and and we know
this you know we know this in in
lovemaking and you know lovemaking is is
is a playful exchange of agency of
giving and receiving of you know agency
and reciprocation and yeah and and so
you know I think I think a deep part of
home is is the is the the particular
satisfaction of the inferior that that
we are that we are a recipients of
costly grace and but that grace has been
given to us though it has been costly it
is also well given it's it's the
superiors good pleasure to to do that
for the inferior and you know we
experienced this with our pets we
experienced this with our children we
experienced this in marriage and it's
it's experiencing the fullness of life
as being by being able to participate
and in dwell in in the various positions
within relationality and and and home is
I mean again I think it gets back it
gets back to to that to the marriage
conversation in that marriage
there is a there is a participation in
home like there can't be without the
audacious promises given that none of us
can really live up to and and the other
person knowing it Wow I just it's a
couple of things I have so much going on
with me with you right now like this
conversation so many things are present
I have like tears coming up to my eyes
my heart feels super open like there's
so many things that just moved me and
what you just said like first of all I
felt really impacted like by when you
talked about
yeah the homeless sometimes I sometimes
when it gets cold out I think of them I
think what I just I I feel struck by and
moved by is that they reside in you on
some level yeah right there in your
breath of concern right like just that
way of being is just really moved me
like what you just demonstrated there
like just by being you and the way that
you live your life I could feel where
that comes from
and I could feel you know what comes up
to me is actually something that he said
to me in our first talk which by the way
I loved our first like when we'd not
loving this one do but one of the things
that you said to me that um I learnt
like I learned a little bit more about
my own history in our conversations um
what and in through some of the things
that you were you recognized you put it
in a way that like had it be so much
more present to me and one of the things
that you said is yeah I you you you you
really got my grandparents right
whoo-hoo in some ways kind of saw me and
saw my parents kind of like and the
instability and stuff and they we use of
this one thing and I've thought about
this over and over and over again they
poured their life into this young man
like poured it into it's like I was like
that's exactly what they did like they
really did and you're right there there
was a sense of it wouldn't have been
what it is if there was a guarantee that
that was gonna work out
like on some level I think that pouring
was in the presence of a recognition of
unable to fulfill in any controlled way
whether or not this pouring of my life
and you know it's the last part of their
life right it's like in in many ways
they could probably be like clever
doneness but but they thought of me when
it was cold right they held me in way in
pour and so as you're talking about that
there's an immediately yeah you're right
there's a there's an inadequacy or an a
what was it that you said in deficiency
what was the thing that you said about
what was inherent is the awareness of is
it lack with CS Lewis I think he's a
specific pleasure of the inferior yeah
the pleasure of the inferior it's funny
because
yeah that sense of pouring your life
into somebody right with every intention
if you can control that thing you would
but like really realizing like I could
just like pour my life for the last 10
years and I there isn't
I am i it i inherently know that like
that i don't have control over the
outcome of how that happens but i can't
not do it
yeah in the spirit of that evoke city
yeah that's so that really like really
oh it's I just feel really opened like
it touches my heart yeah and and I you
know I was thank you Paul no thank you
I mean it's it's beautiful to be seen
mmm you know I was I was so one of the
homeless guys turned 60 and it was his
birthday
and so I facilitated the phone call
between him and his parents who are in
their 90's and just in that phone call
so this particular individual has a lot
of this is how he's homeless for a
reason
but you know and I just just in that
moment seeing the relationships of these
parents who you know the father
especially I think continues to reach
out and pour himself into his 60 year
old son as best he can who this 60 year
old son will likely in my estimation you
know he he'll his mental illness will
not be fixed his addictions will likely
not be fixed yeah he is going to walk
around on the streets for another five
or 10 years and something's gonna take
him out it could be a car it could be a
bug
it could be a crime but that's going to
happen and the you know there's there's
new what why should we care about
something like this image yet we do
deeply and and we have again a yearning
along and we have a sense that that
Shalom that that life the way it should
be has been deeply ruptured and we have
a yearning that it be that it be healed
and restored and we have a yearning that
and that there could be home and home
includes you know the the father and the
mother embracing the Sun now this 60
year old individual is also divorced
because this marriage couldn't take the
you know everything father of four and
his children I met one of his children
they're young adults in their 20s and
and you see this and you you know my
heart longs for restoration my heart
longs for that they can find home and
you know even on the little short phone
call when the the 90 year old parents
and the 60 year old son are trying to
find each other in the conversation yeah
you know you can you just you just yearn
and long
you see glimpses of participation of
home and and yet you you long and you
yearn for its for its consummation yeah
we don't know what we have Inklings of
what that would look like but we don't
know how we could make it so and so you
said and you watch and you respect the
holiness of the moment and and you live
you live in hope for that consummation
for him for his parents for his children
and all along and and we all do that for
ourselves too because every marriage you
know there are moments in marriage of of
bliss yeah but there's they're far more
moments in marriage of longing of
longing for home of longing for
communion of of wishing that that we
could live up to the the needs and
desires of the other and the other could
live up to our needs and desires as well
and and it's it's in that tension I
think that we are pulled we are pulled
into the future and it's institutions
like marriage that actually form and
shape that institutions like Parenthood
that that do this and so you know to
bring it back to wisdom you know wisdom
is knowing how what is the marriage
marriage is you know wisdom plus agency
and and that then you get an institution
and and these children hopefully will
learn from that yeah and it's just this
oh my you know you know as I'm thinking
right like I think we talked about
unconditional love like we know what
we're talking about right like what and
I'm really hearing a like it just a
erratic I'm getting a radically
different picture of what you're talking
about because on some level when I'm
hearing is that like with the father
who's been in his in whatever way that
he can at 60 is pouring up and it's
almost certainly not gonna work out
right yet he pours right Eve hordes and
it's not like because it's not only not
what's interesting is when I think what
I'm getting I see if I can bring words
to it it's like I think if I walk with
this it's like I what I'm getting is
it's it's not only that he's doing it
knowing it's not gonna work
but even if it did work out that
yearning would still be there it's true
it's radically unconditional like funny
I'm thinking now I'm really thinking
about
[Music]
you know I've I've I've oh I love I've
always been so intrigued by the two
fingers of Michelangelo okay there's a
rink there's a profound reason why that
captured us right yeah it's like what I
my understanding is when I studied
painting it like that scene is always
before that was always very depicted
depicted where it's kind of like the
human being was the meat or one that was
yearning for God and like God was kind
of a you know a distance or an
indifference or sturdiness to it but all
of a sudden like you know it's that it's
that painting is considered the
culmination or the peak of humanism of
the Renaissance right and no wonder it's
like because here Michael a Jones like
know God has tendons and guts and like
and it's like eternity actually yearns
for finitude right like that that sense
in the pit and they don't touch and if
they did touch no one would even look at
that painting it's that they don't touch
which is the thing that touch is so
touching about it right his sense of and
I oftentimes have got that picture of
like when I've been really really like
with people and like you really see
their hearts I could just get this sense
it's almost like in every human heart is
are those two fingers and that
experience you know and just like the
movie in the book that was written about
Michelangelo they call it the agony and
the ecstasy and there's like this is
this is like whatever this is right
seems to be an experience of absolute
like could be torturous but it and the
very same thing can be ecstatic and I'm
I'm just present to that as you're
talking of that on some level we're
talking about something so personal
yeah right yet something at the same
time is so transpersonal like so you
know but almost like yeah yeah it's
really just really rich I just kind of
mostly just feel it my heart I'd try to
bring words basically Paul you just
opened my heart well but that's
beautiful and I I'd never you know I've
seen that picture how many times but
I've never thought of yeah the disc you
know the I mean you're exactly right
you're exactly right that it wouldn't if
there was like this and you know
everybody'd move on to the next thing
Hey but now see us Lewis talked about
that as as as sense such where it's it
that's a you know that's joy and longing
and it's it's this means this it's this
ache in our heart that is you know that
we can't get enough of you know
nostalgia tries to tries to get at that
but you nostalgia sort of sells too
cheap and no and and I think that's and
for Lewis it was that that aching joy
that drew him you know you know that
that's what that that's what that's what
drew him that's what and I get that
sense we are pulled
we are pulled into the future by the
future we are pulled into the future by
home yeah yeah in that and what I'm
really getting from this conversation
and I'm very in a very rich way is
precisely are somehow our innate
homelessness allows for the importance
of home to be forever important to us
right but yet never achieved in some
kind of mechanistic finalized way it's
funny like like I think about this
picture you know of course I like like
being present to this and then just
looking at you know
housing complexes and suburbs and stuff
like that
like oh yeah this this is it really has
it show itself yeah yeah
thank you Paul this has been really
great
I unfortunately I have a client that I
have to I have to meet no this is this
is no you you're you're so generous guy
and and yeah now I really appreciate I
appreciate you I appreciate this kind of
really if you if you move to Alameda I
get to Alameda semi-regularly yeah yeah
yeah I've got a friend there's a church
in Alameda so man to Alameda
so it really it's really just send me an
email I'll send you my phone number too
if you want to text me let's say
hopefully get together okay great thank
you guy thank you so much huh take care
bye bye bye