howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show listeners have asked us to
provide pointers some of the resources
we talked about on the show we now have
links to books and articles referenced
in recent podcasts that are available on
our website
we also offer full transcripts go to gym
rut show.com
that's Jim ruts show com today's guest
is rich Bartlett one of the leading
thinkers and tool developers in the
domain of self organizing work and
living thanks for having me Jim ah it's
great great to have you here guy that I
really enjoy following rich is one of
the founders of Inspiral a work can live
cooperative we'll be talking about more
and the hum an educational and
consulting group that teaches others how
to self organize he has a very
interesting newsletter I subscribe to
that's available at rich decibels
decibels as if the sound units dotsub
stack calm personally I love his medium
posts Richard D Bartlett on medium and
his tweet streams is one of my favorites
at rich decibels as usual all the
resources we mentioned will be available
at our episode page for this episode on
my podcast website Jim rut show.com rich
has also written a book that's not yet
finished patterns for decentralized
organizing that's best found by just
googling the name patterns for
decentralized organizing Richard D
Bartlett and again the link will be
available on our website
so Richard lots that you do let's start
with Inspiral how does it work what is
it first came to my attention back in
the early game B days 1.0 the 2013 when
we investigated loomio as a possible
organizing tool we kind of looked a
little bit at in spiral well probably
not as deeply as we should have we ended
up not picking loomio ended up using
Basecamp instead but tell us about in
spiral where to come from what does it
do where is it today
I have
to always give this disclaimer that
Inspiral is a very complex system and so
everyone you ask will have a different
story about what it is but I can tell
you my version of the truth and you sort
of have to start take many samples to
get a full picture but it's a couple
hundred people there originated in New
Zealand and so a lot of those people
live in New Zealand but now I don't know
maybe a third or more of them live in
other countries around the world and we
are supporting each other to do more
meaningful work whatever that means
so we haven't defined what meaningful
work is we say it's stuff that matters
and that that implies that what matters
to you if it matters to you it matters
to us and we don't have to put a very
tight definition on what that is so it's
kind of a community of friends who trust
each other a lot and do a lot of
experimentation with different ways of
organizing and making small cooperatives
and businesses just a huge variety of
different little small businesses that
all have overlapping brands and
overlapping people and yeah we do a ton
of experimentation with how do we how do
we prototype the organization of the
future where we're working together on
on relationships of trust and equality
and freedom and autonomy and those sorts
of things and and move away from the way
of organizing which is this top-down
coercive hierarchical control system
where people are you know like my my
experience before I worked at in spiral
I always felt that you know like work is
supposed to suck more or less and that's
why they pay you to go there whereas
with in spiral we're trying to do a kind
of work that's really life-giving really
fun really meaningful really purposeful
and and to get paid decent money for
doing it so that's the grand experiment
and it basically came out of the sky
Joshua vial he's a he's a deep dude
another one that you might want to
interview one day and he just had this
experience of trying to he's an engineer
and a programmer so he's got quite an
analytical brain and he came to the
conclusion one day that he had something
like I forget the numbers I think he
said he had 80,000 hours of he could
expect roughly 80,000 hours of
productive life in him and he'd already
used that some fraction of that during
his programming work and then he did
some some sort of modeling of like
what's the most positive impact that I
can have in the world with the remainder
of those hours and he in the modeling
who became very obvious that one man
working as hard as he likes on any
program project is not going to get very
far compared to mobilizing a community
of people that are all working on stuff
and so he set his mind to yeah how do we
recruit a collective of people that are
all working on systems change and how do
we do that in a way that's actually
prototyping the new systems that we want
to live in from the start very cool
could you give me example of some of the
businesses that have spun up under the
Inspiral umbrella sure there's a real
variety so it tends to have a tech side
it's that we've got a lot of tech people
in the community you mentioned Vimeo so
I'm one of the cofounders of loomio and
net that's kind of interesting it came
out of the Occupy movement where we had
this experience of self-organizing and
collective decision-making and and I was
part of the Occupy movement and then I
met the folks at and spiral and it was
sort of from that overlap of those two
communities that Lumia were merged as a
tech platform that's run by a worker
owned cooperative that's trying to do
business for good so that's a you know
it's ongoing ongoing project and then
there's the developer academy so that's
a programming school essentially it's
like a boot camp for for teaching people
how to be excellent programmers with a
sort of Trojan horse mission of actually
teaching programmers about relational
skills and emotional intelligence then
there's quite a few of us because we've
been doing all this experimentation with
different ways of organizing there's an
increasing number of what I would call
insultingly management consultants like
myself who you know have views on how to
design organizations in a new way so
greater-than is a really nice one they
they do a lot of work especially around
collaborative funding and financing they
have you if you've got a membership
organization with thousands of people in
it how can they participate in setting
the budgets their organization for
instance so they do a lot of work around
there and there are a lot of you know
little little software shops usually
it's three four five six people working
together
as software consultants and just making
a little a little temporary brand so
that they can work together and
sometimes these brands coalesce to do
bigger projects very interesting
together does that make a full-time
living for 200 people or are some of
these people still keeping their game a
jobs there's definitely a real mix after
the call I can share with you an impact
report that was done recently that they
will actually have the numbers in it I
don't know the most top of my head but
there's at least a third of us would be
full-time living in this new economy and
in probably a third that are part-time
and then probably the last third more or
less are earning their living in
traditional jobs and traditional
organizations but they're getting
something else from their connection to
the community whether that's inspiration
or friendship or connections or
opportunities or something like that
that's actually good to my mind because
it shows a ramp right people can engage
at various levels and we think about
this a fair amount in our game be world
that people do not jump up a cliff in
general or a few maniacs do I will
probably you would but most people don't
right they want to they want to minimize
their risk by taking a small step at a
time
so being associated in some sense in
which my living isn't on the line is a
lower risk way to start and then doing
part-time work as a next natural
evolution for some of the people then
becoming full-time and actually living
it you know is the third step so I
actually like the fact that you guys
have fallen out that way it seems to be
congruent with human nature and the way
that the majority of people the vast
majority people actually would prefer to
proceed rather than suddenly going from
A to B shall we say hmm if for me it's
it's like a transvestite strategy it's
think I so I come from this background
which is basically Anika is an
anti-capitalist and this oppositional
kind of activist identity and I think
I've grown out of that somewhat and now
I'm in this place where I really I love
the strategy of transverse meant so
taking money out of one system and
putting it in another you know not being
oppositional ii anti-capitalist but
getting your hands on the capital and
putting it to good use and mobilizing on
a different set of principles you know
so that it's but it's going to do
something better in the world than just
make money for
and she capitalists that's funny that's
great because we have the exact same
concept for our game beam movement even
though we're not as far along which is
we call it parasitizing game a right and
it's interesting you mentioned
management consultant we currently are
having a discussion about what are some
of the game be ventures that we believe
would allow us to actually out-compete
game a entities and oddly we've come up
with things like auto repair garages
which are famously corrupt at least in
the United States management consulting
which is high priced low value in many
cases and even ad agencies that are you
know sort of full of the worst kind of
predatory sociopaths and we think we can
do a better job in all those things than
think that you guys found management
consulting also to what degree is there
some kind of shared economics amongst
these various working groups like for
instance that's in spiral itself have a
central account where it can provide
some startup capital for these other
working groups and is there some you
know payment back from the working
groups what are the working groups just
stand on their own bottom and do their
own thing hmm
well I guess the important principles
here are we've done a ton of different
experimentation and so whenever someone
asks you know is this that of capital
available is there a collective fund
have you tried exchanging equity the
answer is always yes because we've just
done so many experiments over the last
decade and the other other important
principle is what we've learnt is what
matters most is the quality of the
relationships that you're maintaining
the trust and their and the openness of
communication between all these people
regardless of what experimentation
you're doing so with those provisos the
way it currently works everyone in the
collective is contributing at least a
tiny little membership contribution you
know so that could be $5 a month some
people are doing a lot more than that
you know that if they're in a position
where they're earning a lot of income
and they they attribute some of that
income to and spiral so so for instance
if you're doing management consulting
work and you've got a really high day
rate and you know that you get you know
that you're benefiting from the Inspiral
brand then you might be in a position
when you're going to share ten or
fifteen percent of your income with the
collective and all of that money goes
into a central fund and then at the
moment I think roughly half of that
income
just covers some of our essential stuff
so we've got a few Community Managers
someone's writing a newsletter we've got
our technology you know there's some
sort of basic administration to run a
network of 200 people and then on top of
that the rest is discretionary spending
and so we essentially run a kind of
internal crowdfunding where anyone can
propose to spend the collective money so
usually usually once we have sort of ten
or twenty thousand dollars in the
collective bank account then we'll open
up a round of proposals so anyone in the
in the network is able to say yeah I've
got this new idea for our product and I
need five thousand dollars to get
started with that could you fund me or
it could be I want to go to a conference
and talk about it spiral or the kids
really creative you know sometimes it's
like we're having events and I want to
pay for childcare or wouldn't it be
great if we had a fund available for
people who need counseling or conflict
mediators and so on so it's really I
mean I've I've got a fund called The
Faerie blog mother and I'm the very blog
mother and I ran around dispensing $100
bills on people for writing blog posts
on the Inspiral blog you know so there's
just a huge amount of creativity and
what we do with that shared economy so
there's that layer which is not a huge
amount of money given given you've got
200 people most of whom earning
reasonable money but then this there's a
there's a layer underneath set which is
more at their the small scale with what
different language for we call them
cruise or pods livelihood pods they're
basically small cooperatives where
you'll have maybe five or six people who
are consultants that could they could go
out into the market as independent
freelancers and make a living that way
but they coalesce into these small
groups where they get the Solidarity of
working in the team and and the ability
to take on bigger jobs and also we do
income pooling and those small groups so
that you take out the the peaks and
troughs out of your income and you can
just have a stable salary where if
you've got a good trust between four or
five consultants you know each other
well it turns out you can you can share
all of your income either it's some of
them are doing it in a full communist
way where it's like all the money goes
into one place and then everyone takes
what they need out of it and then other
ones they're a bit more towards
the capitalists end of the spectrum so
they'll have some kind of allocation
formula where it's you know it depends
on how much how many hours did you put
in and what's your hourly rate and so on
and you have some kind of complicated
algorithm for determining how much money
to share with each other but that's that
to me is the more interesting part is
the the kind of financial solidarity
that happens at the really small scale I
like that very interesting
is the pluralism in how the smaller
groups are organized
I see implicitly that some people as you
said full communism and one extreme some
kind of contractual sharing economy
capitalism at the other and probably
lots of things in between and at least
my take is we don't yet know what really
works in this what comes next world and
we've got to do a bunch of experiments
to find out so it sounds like you guys
are doing several experiments in
parallel on you know things like
financial sharing within your own
organization and and what we do know
that works at least this is my strong
opinion so far from from the experience
for the last decade is is this emphasis
on small groups so like there was an
earlier phase of Inspiral where the main
activity was basically a large
freelancers collective with a hundred
plus people in it they were all sharing
the brand of Inspiral services and it
was essentially one or two people in the
middle of that system who who were
actually the business owners who
actually understood the overall system
whereas most people were were just
playing their part as an individual and
didn't really have a sense of the whole
and and it didn't work you know like
there was some real problems with their
model where we had problems beer fits
for instance there's this dysfunctional
setup with risk where one person and out
of that collective over 100 could
tarnish your brand but by having a bad
interaction with a customer right so
it's like we we learned over time that
instead of having this one enormous
collective of people trying to do this
sort of peace love and sharing money
thing distributing it into many small
pools where there's a independent brand
for each one of those there's an
independent legal entity people have to
understand the ins and outs of running a
business at that scale and then there's
a lot of collaboration that happens
across those borders people are coming
and going between those borders all the
time but there's the right
of cell boundaries there to keep that to
keep the incentives square I like it
sounds like you guys have learned some
things from your experiments and are now
converging towards a replicatable model
I'm actually gonna skip ahead there cuz
that sets me up for a later topic on my
list of the several medium posts that I
read and in this case reread to get
ready for this podcast one that hopped
out to me is almost central to your
thinking is titled micro solidarity
number two and in that you lay out a and
that's the one where you talk about self
dyad the crew etc you talk about and I
think an extraordinarily practical way
and one that at least got my attention
an idea for how we organize at multiple
layers you want to go over that talk
about that a little bit why that's
important hmm sure so the way that I
think about it and like I said at the
start you know my my take on in spiral
is just one of many and other folks will
have a different approach and I don't
want to I don't want to be the end of
the story but I am chatting at one
particular ascent up the mountain you
know and and so that that's just a just
to own my subjectivity on that piece but
the thing that I've articulated there
somehow is having resonance and a lot of
different contexts so it seems like it's
doing some good the way that I look at
it is it's it's it's all about how do we
practice a kind of relationship there is
built on different premises than the one
that I was raised with you know that I'm
there on the top-down hierarchical
command and control isolated distant
atomized individualized neoliberal etc
etc there's like a way of being that I
was raised in that me and a lot of other
people don't want to be a part of you
you would call it game a and we want to
be in game B which requires a different
way of relating to others where we're no
longer having one person in charge of
everyone we're not trying to have these
top-down relationships we're trying to
work together and with some degree of
equality whatever that looks like we
don't know and practice we're trying to
grow into this game be a wet way of
being in the world and into my way of
thinking that requires us to change how
we relate to other individuals so it's
it's a big learning process about how do
we relate and and this the reason I
emphasize this is because most of the
people that I encounter that are
interested in you know restarting
civilization or something they tend to
come in from a perspective of most the
ones that I know coming from it off we
just had the right technology you know
like if we it would be a bit like Airbnb
in a bit like uber but it would be owned
by the drivers and you know they have
this whole technological plan about how
if we just had the right systems and
structures and agreements then then we'd
have a new a new way of being or as I
think it goes a layer underneath the
technology into the culture into our
psychology and so on so that's why the
writing that I'm doing on this topic is
a lot of it's quite touchy-feely
you know it's about intimacy and
vulnerability and connection and these
sorts of things because that's just what
I've seen is like it kind of required
necessary prerequisite before you get to
the really great stuff of yeah having
one of these shared brands and shared
money and freedom and connection and so
on so the layers that I articulated in
the Metro solidarity proposal it starts
with the self and and I found it useful
to even think about the self as a group
so there's a therapeutic modality called
internal family systems which I don't
know well I haven't studied well but I
feel like I kind of independently
started articulating some of the ideas
that are in that and now I'm rapidly
trying to catch up and learn because
they've got a lot more depth on it than
I do but they treat the individual as a
group and in a near language they call
them parts and so the idea is they you
know I have my confident part and my
anxious part and my silly part and my
happy part and you know all these
different all these different characters
that that live and have the shared
custody of me and there's always work
that I can do to bring those parts into
greater harmony so for instance you know
for me one of the ways this is showed up
simile really obviously in the last
couple of weeks being here we are in the
middle of a pandemic and I'm a migrant
in a country where I don't know the
place and I don't know the language I
some of my parts are very fearful you
know there's a lot of anxiety and and
and
I'm frightened about how things could go
wrong and for the first couple of weeks
of that experience I was really trying
to disarm that part of myself just
ignore it just clamp down on it don't
look at it don't think about it didn't
work you know it really didn't work it
put me in a state of cognitive
dissonance until I could just treat that
part of myself
as a member of the family as a member of
the group you know over hey one part of
me is fearful what does he need you know
if I can just treat him with some
tenderness and respect maybe it'll be
okay and so that's better practice which
is about I guess deepening my own
maturity and my own competence and my
own ability to deal with you know you'd
say in in the game game be space you
talk about sovereignty a lot I think
that's a lot of what that's about is
thank not being knowing what are the
Pats myself they get they get triggered
or they get pulled into fantasizing
ideas about how we're going to transform
the world or they get freaked out about
the wrong political idea or its lots of
different reasons that I lose my
sovereignty and so I have a lot of focus
on this thing about developing the
relationship in the parts of your cells
that's one piece and then the second
step up the ladder from there I call the
dyad and that's just it's just about two
people two cells coming into contact
with each other and for argument's sake
I think it's useful to to borrow from
Rihanna iyslah's work on what she calls
the partnership domination lens and
she's brilliant
maybe you would be useful to read her
book nurturing our humanity or another
one the chalice and the blade and and
her frame is looking at world history
but then also looking at family dynamics
and societies and so on and evaluating
them on this this polarity that she's
named the partnership domination lens so
are we relating to each other more as
partners where we are two equally
important about different people or are
we relating to each other in a spirit of
domination where one person is is trying
to exert their will over the other one
is trying to exert their subjectivity
over the other and I think that's a
really useful heuristic really useful
lens for looking at all kinds of
relationships and and and the way that I
understand what we've been doing within
spiral is we're trying to learn how can
we get a few hundred people together and
have them all relate to each other and
as
partnership and and the reason that I
call out this dyad is because that's a
great place to practice you know you
know what it's like to be in
relationship with one person and have a
conversation with them where it feels
like they're you are equal you know not
the same they're different but that
you're relating to each other
horizontally that there's not you're not
trying to dominate me or tell me what's
the right way to think and I'm not
trying to do that to you - you know I'm
just I'm witnessing you I'm listening to
you and observing and we're in this
exchange people know what that feels
like and so there's part of the practice
is just learn how to notice when you are
coming out of partnership into a
domination posture and see you'll see
what you can do to to come back into
partnership and I should also say you
know domination is the is only half the
story because the other half is
submission right its domination and
Submission that's like two-player game
and it doesn't matter which side of the
equation you're on there's still
maneuvers that you can take to get you
closer to partnership indeed sounds
actually like you're describing a good
marriage courses a dyadic relationship
and you know I've been fortunate to have
been married 39 years to a wonderful
person and I think we've always managed
to see each other as complete peers
though different and I think that's the
secret to making a dyad work and I was
frankly fortunate and unlikely to have
had good parental model my working-class
parents my dad dropped out of high
school when it was after ninth grade my
mother left home when she was 14 I grew
up in a neighborhood where half the
adults had dropped out of high school so
this was not what you'd call socially
advanced but nonetheless my parents had
a marriage of a complete peer dome which
was very interesting I never saw them
seriously argue I never saw them take a
serious decision other than by consensus
and so I think that was you know that
and their marriage lasted till the death
of my father 54 years I think it was
something like that so yeah your dyad
sounds to me like very similar to
healthy long-term marriage yeah
it's also I'm you know like a best
friend or a mentor or a coach or there's
a lot of different places that these
relationships come up so then the step
up from there I call the crew
and I chose that word because it's a bit
like the crew of a sailing ship where
again you're all doing different you
know when you're sailing a boat you all
have different roles and you play to
those strengths and you achieve
something as a whole that you couldn't
on your own and I I really focus on the
smaller scale I've seen it's up to eight
people but I kind of regret that I think
it maybe even should be kept at six
people I usually say it's the size of a
the number of people you can get around
a dinner table and have one conversation
with and and that scale is really
important because you know what's her
name Margaret Mead it's got this theory
often overused quote about never never
doubt the power of a small group to
change the world indeed it's the only
thing that ever has we hear that quote
quite frequently but I wonder if people
really take it to heart that the only
thing that's going to change the world
is a small group of committed citizens
and therefore to me our job is to learn
how to be one of those small groups of
committed citizens I think that should
be so for anyone that wants to do some
kind of change in the world your first
principle should be okay where's the
small group that I'm going to work with
and that means it's not just about me
with my heroic ideas but it's there it's
the little crew it's there it's the four
or five of us that are really going to
take on some serious work
so you mentioned loomio that was my
first crew I think where we started that
with six people and we raised I don't
know we raised a couple of million
dollars an ethical financing and we've
built a piece of technology that's been
used by a few hundred thousand people
and it's like I don't think it's this
amazing change the world project but I
think it's made a useful contribution to
the world and it's definitely orders of
magnitude more of an impact than I could
have ever had on my own you know there's
this real sweet spot where you can
achieve a lot with with a small talented
group with people that all have skill
that they all have trust that they all
know how to collaborate with each other
and they've all got different
superpowers you can really just get a
huge amount of work done in that group
and the reason I focus on the small bit
is because once you get beyond eight
nineteen people you've got to need a
whole bunch of architecture to hold that
group together you're gonna have to
start making a lot of stuff explicit and
having
yeah you're given to the difficult staff
of governance you know like you need to
have a lot of agreements about what's
happening and conflict management
systems and checks and balances and all
these kind of things whereas if you're
doing it at the small scale you can move
a lot on you can develop a kind of
shared context with five or six people
using not much more than dialogue you
know just having having a call once a
week or something where you sync up with
each other that can be enough of an
organizational structure but once you go
beyond that scale then you need to put
all this architecture in and there tends
to tends towards inefficiency you know
it tends towards drama tinsel as debate
and so I'm really focused on how do we
produce a world full of really excellent
crews really excellent small groups of
people doing meaningful stuff supporting
each other to play to their strengths
and and and move the world in the right
direction and so for most people getting
into this that means you need a practice
because because you're not going to get
it right the first time
you know your people are the first time
that you bring a team together and you
try and do your project you're probably
going to fall out makes sense
push back a little bit on the size range
or maybe there's two different things
here as you may know I was a
entrepreneur in my early career started
several companies and then later helped
many other companies start so I've had
exposure to maybe 17 startup companies
of which 13 or 14 ended up producing
positive results for their investors and
the model I always used is that was 20
that was the magic number in this size
but I will say and I think about it here
it's somewhat different than your crew
of three to six because three to six
would correspond to the loose groups
within the 20 and you know I still
remember a couple of my startups where
we'd have yes we had a tech team and we
had a sales team and we had a marketing
team say the customer service team he's
had a few people in it but yeah there
was a nominal head but the truth of
matter was we ran the company around the
lunch table you know every day we got
together for lunch and it could be up to
20 people on a big table and we somehow
managed to run it to 15 or 20 around the
table even though we were sort of past 6
or so which is it
number we were you know loosely grouped
into nominal teams with nominal heads so
maybe there's something in between the
crew and then your next level up which
is sort of 6 to 20 we're thinking about
at least yeah for sure
I think this is a really important piece
here where you say these nominal heads
I'm guessing that that most of all of
these startups they did have some degree
of centralized ownership and leadership
and that's a that's a really familiar
model that we know and so I think in
some contexts people are just more
familiar with that way of working and so
you can go further whereas if you're
trying to do something where you have
completely decentralized ownership or
decentralized leadership it's much more
experimental when people don't have such
clear models of how to behave and so
that's why I focus on the smaller scale
where people get to practice if you have
20 people and you're trying to organize
without a central point where there's
one person who owns this you know the
three co-founders in the middle it's
good you're going to spend a lot of time
in debates about what our structure
should be yeah maybe maybe not
I don't know we managed to do it even
though we were game a we had you know
stock and investors and you know there
was concentrated ownership upwards
towards the earliest senior players but
everybody had stock in the company but
it's always been one of my rules you
know even the receptionist has stock in
the company from day one right and well
I think we acted as if in general and
then this has always been one of my
business rules radical intellectual
honesty that anyone who could say
something useful and intelligent had
exactly the same standing as anybody
else yeah I'm thinking about the context
of say you get into a difficult deadlock
there's a conflict there's probably one
or two people in that group of 20 that
everyone is going to look to to solve
that conflict yeah better it's true like
those those concentrations in power
they're always there yep even in
apiculture we know right mm-hmm
one of my favorite yes on the show a
couple of times
Jessica flack she's written a lot about
policing in apiculture z-- and to some
degree monkey cultures and yep there's
always somebody who when there's a
deadlock figures things out but perhaps
that's emergent
and it doesn't have to be the same
person if you go back and look at
hunter-gatherer governance very very
good book called hierarchy in the forest
by Chris Boehm it actually should have
been called anti hierarchy in the forest
because it talks about how
hunter-gatherer people kept formal
hierarchies from forming and they had a
concept called role based management
obviously they didn't have management
consultants to give a nice fancy name
like that
I don't think but in reality that's what
they practice which is they sort of knew
who to look to for what so maybe it was
a good for hunting questions and it was
ma for gathering questions and it was
zou for weaving questions and if there
was a deadlock amongst the community
about one of those three domains
everybody quote/unquote knew that these
were the best thinkers on those three
topics and so the the role based leader
would typically step forward in that
domain and break the deadlock yeah I
totally buy that model with that
sometimes we call that a competency
network you know where and the joy of
that network is that there will be a
rough consensus about who is the best at
weaving but it's not a sort of formal
consensus you can actually have an
overlap everyone has their own terrain
of who they trust on which topic and
there's a bit of there's a bit of wiggle
room in that terrain and a little bit of
messiness which is actually really
resilient and really productive and as
opposed to when you have the formal
structure where you have departments and
everything's very clearly you know this
is the person that you report to and
this person is the smartest one on this
topic thank if you can organize as a
network you're much more resilient and
efficient I think exactly so it turns
out Lulu who was the expert on weaving
is starting to lose it a little bit
maybe she's drinking too heavy but her
younger cousin Lala is gradually arising
as the most knowledgeable weaver then
Lulu gradually loses her authority to
Lele in a way that's not brittle right
that you would see in a game a
organization I'll give you a real world
example in my own companies you know I
might have been the CEO or the CEO or
the founder CTO I had all kinds of
different roles at different companies
but I would always make sure that I
would announce loudly is don't expect me
to ever make a decision about anything
that has to do with aesthetics
I have knowest
makes sense at all my aesthetic
construction crayon on grocery bag so
don't ever ask me my opinion about which
logo is better or what color we should
have for our letterhead I am entirely
incompetent in fact I have anti
competence if I choose it it's almost
certainly wrong something tells me
that's not a false humility I'm coming
for you antigen nope it's not I am just
in confident you also me draw they're
all like if I asked me to draw a person
it looks like about a rather untalented
five-year-old so I think that a
pronouncement of that sort provided room
for role-based competency to arise the
so this does sort of illustrate why I'm
interested in looking at the self as
well you know because there's some
people that wouldn't be willing to say
that about themselves that they said
that they can clearly delineate these
are my competencies and over here I've
got no talent like that takes a certain
maturity to even be able to admit that
and it's an essential principle of being
able to collaborate effectively with a
group of people is that everyone knows
what their strengths are and you have a
sort of shared map of who's good at what
yeah that's a very very good point think
of it as kind of an inverse
dunning-kruger right dunning-kruger
syndrome which a certain leading
political figure in the United States is
an exemplar of its the class of people
who think they know a shitload more than
they actually do much better to probably
overestimate your in competences than to
overestimate your competences anyway
let's move on in your hierarchy let's go
from the crew up to your next level so
the next and and like you you know you
name this this level of six to twenty
people I'm sure they're out there are
more stages but just the ones that I
named for my own purposes the next stage
I call the congregation and that's
basically a Dunbar number you know more
or less and I think the jury's still out
on what them at Dunbar number actually
is because it's so culturally dependent
so context dependent but in any case it
might be a hundred people in some cases
and it might be two or three hundred in
others but it's that it's the number of
people that you can have who basically
know each other you know where you can
basically assume that there's no
strangers and then if a stranger shows
up everyone will be able to spot them
right away because it's there huh we
don't know you I mean the reason I call
it a congregation partly it's because
it's funny because it sounds churchy
and I've got this churchy background
that I'm a excommunicated from a
fundamentalist church so it's kind of
funny for me to use that word but also
it's because the main job of the
congregation is to congregate it's the
verb it's about the gathering it's about
their coming together and so in in
spirals case the congregation is about
200 people and we get together once a
year and not everyone can get there but
like a critical mass of people will come
to a gathering once a year for about a
week and in that time it's it functions
like a dating pool for all the crews
it's the space where you get to meet new
collaborators you get to update each
other on the projects that you've done
you know you might be sitting around the
campfire late at night and exchanging
stories about near-misses you
experienced in your crew and there's a
lot of mingling there you know it's
about all the crews kind of blending
together for a while and developing the
sense of there's something there's
something bigger than just my little
startup which is focused on you know
like loomio this decision-making towards
that's that's nice on its own but it's
much more compelling to me to be
connected to this bigger thing where
it's like are there's thirty different
ventures all doing different related
projects that that gives me an enormous
sense of pride you know and belonging
and it's really encouraging to be in
their in their network and again the
congregation of say 150 people if we
want to choose an average is a lot
smaller than most of the groups that
people are working in you know like so
if you think about Burning Man and all
those related participatory community
slash festivals that are happening
around the world that people get really
excited about
they usually have thousands and
thousands of people in them and it feels
good for a short time to do that but and
people go to those things because they
feel like they belong they feel like
they've found the others but the fact is
like a group of that scale most of the
people are going to be anonymous to each
other they might have an imagined
community where they sense like ah
you're one of those people and I'm one
of those people but if you're if you're
in a group that's larger than 150 people
you can't actually count on anyone to
know you and you can't count on anyone
to to actually care about you when you
get sick say or like when you have some
real needs you can't really count on
those people to come through for you and
so again it's like it's a smaller scale
than most people are used to
came out organizing it I was going to
expand your concept of the congregation
a little bit this you know again comes
from my own business career where we not
you can think of the congregation not
only as a dating service for Cruz but
also there are some problems and some
opportunities that take a lot more than
a crew to solve right there are some
businesses you just can't build without
under two hundred three hundred people
and was something we discovered at the
Thompson corporation big a billion
dollar at the time multinational but I
worked there in the 90s now Thomson
Reuters and we tried hard couldn't do it
in all of our businesses but in many of
our businesses we had identified a size
of about 300 that is the most people we
wanted to have at one facility and so
even if a business unit itself was
bigger than that we tried to you know
not have more than 300 of them at one
street address and those 300 people
acted together as a coherent
congregation you know they had their
Christmas party together they had you
know they'd order pizzas they'd have you
know quarterly addresses from whoever
the leader of that congregation was if I
jokingly my wife helped me with this we
jokingly named all the ranks in Thompson
from Pope on down right so you had
Cardinals and Archbishop's and bishops
and Monsignors and priests and deacons
and all this sort of stuff and so
typically a group of 300 would have been
about the equivalent of a bishop and
there would be you know four or five
priests below that with groups around
100 between fifty and a hundred so the
congregation and you know we discovered
it to be 300 and I think that was in the
context of a relatively highly networked
world with lots of email lots of voice
mail video conferencing didn't really
work very well in those days but but
anyway it's you know the Dunbar number
plus or minus you know in the game be
world we talk about a group called a
Dunbar which is you know somewhere
between 100 and 300 with a mean maybe of
150 that might be responsible for a
certain set of things for instance
housing making sure that nobody in a
game beat Dunbar is ever homeless under
any circumstance which means if you vote
somebody into your Dunbar and they
somehow lose their home they're gonna be
sleeping on somebody's couch because
that's a commitment we make at the level
of the Dunbar
it seems to me an appropriate commitment
to make it that level so anyway that's
just a ruddy an expansion of your
concept which i think is you know sort
of bang on and I think we've all you
know learned a little bit from Robin
Dunbar and his work but we're all a
little skeptical that you know we don't
think 150 is a magic number but
something in that range
is saying something important so now
beyond the congregation what do we have
well beyond that I just call it the
crown because the point is once you get
beyond that scale you have an
expectation of anonymity and it doesn't
matter if it's 500 or if it's 5 million
bank you're just most people are not
going to know most people in that
context and and I've just decided not to
have too many opinions at that scale
it's it's people that are really
motivated about this you know how we're
going to change the world or how we're
going to change this country or you know
thinking in terms of millions of people
at once and I'm happy to leave them to
it and I'm much more interested in how
do we develop relationships of
excellence at a scale that's yeah Dunbar
or lower and that's my area yeah I would
agree if we don't solve the lower
problems we won't solve the higher
problems correctly though we do have a
concept in game be called proto B which
is you know 2 to n Dunbar's who
collectively or by affiliation agree to
a certain set of principles and the
proto B's can have different sets of
principles and the principle set should
be small enough to allow considerable
diversity amongst Dunbar's what we call
coherent pluralism you know so proto B
might have here are our nine principles
right if you want to be a Dunbar in
proto B cactus then you should include
in your principles this set as a core
and there should be competing proto B's
and so that's one of the ways we think
of getting to a somewhat higher number
aggregate around coherent pluralism
using multiple Dunbar's and let the
proto B's differ in how they choose what
their coherent core should be whether
that works are not oh no it's all theory
at this point a lot of it's written up
in my paper a journey to game be
available on medium but I'm you know
less confident about that level of
organization than I am some of these
lower levels we've been talking about
I'm writing a related hypothesis but
it's different and it's I think useful
to name it just to see how it plays out
which is you're talking about principles
and I'm trying to see how far we can get
without naming principles without naming
purpose without naming values and just
they explicitly focused on that on the
practices they could keep it really
close to the verbs to the action to the
doing like what are the methodologies we
use what is the stuff that happens and
see how far we can go without naming
these abstractions these nouns these
principles these purposes because that I
mean that's a reaction potentially an
overreaction from me to seeing first of
all how much time groups put into
articulating these nice attractions but
secondly how there's always a large gap
between the stated principles that you
all agreed to and the actual behavior
that you see and so I'm doing this
experiment of just like it's just
explicitly focused on the behavior and
and try and keep it as concrete as
possible and and leave the abstractions
to manage themselves mmm I'm totally
open that by the way I will fully
confess that I am an old fart with lots
of game a heritage and malware and so my
own use of the word principles should be
taken as somewhat atavistic and if we
can get away without them so much the
better but I'm not convinced I'd have to
see it but I'm certainly open to it
I do like principles that the way that
Ray Dalio uses them you know which is
thank what category of scenario are we
in in this moment have we seen this type
of scenario before and what did we do
last time
Becky's got a very coherent framework
for thinking about decision-making and
thinking about how to respond to novelty
and I think that that's really really
useful but the use of the principles as
in like we love transparency and honesty
and inclusion it's thank give me a break
yeah it's it's fitting that I found that
they've worked for me over the years
because I said the number one principle
in all my company's intellectual honesty
right and we actually point to it you
know you never shoot the messenger right
you never steal credit you know you
always bring forward that which is
important to the company even if it's
embarrassing to you or your work team I
have found that one principle in
particular to be extraordinarily useful
the other one was our Thompson principle
which we would articulate as you
should push responsibility down as far
as you feel comfortable and then one
level lower and while I will say that
there was of course lots of hypocrisy
about that because humans love to
aggregate power but we would call that
one out if we saw people who were not
pushing Authority down and I still
recall at a company meeting which we'd
have every year with the top I know how
many was two or three hundred executives
and then this highly decentralized
company those two or three hundred
executives had a lot of authority and I
remember a talk I gave when we were you
know trying to mobilize this
historically print and cd-rom based
publisher to move into the internet I
said one huge competitive advantage we
have in this transition is we have in
our company five hundred people allowed
to waste fifty thousand dollars right
and I looked at my CFO while I was
saying this it was up there on the stage
with me and he winced uh but it was he
was a great CEO but he agreed and I said
you know our number-one competitor
head-to-head competitor mcgraw-hill
there's only three people allowed to
waste $50,000 right and having 500
people who have the delegated right to
just make an arbitrary crazy decision on
$50,000 will give us a huge advantage in
out evolving McGraw Hill and sure enough
we did so principles could be useful the
sense that my kind of company yeah it
was at those days unfortunately got a
new management team came over blah blah
they it up oh well now it's
purely financial driven money on money
return such as life but so those kinds
of principles they should be small
number and they have to be really taken
seriously right and yes
hypocrisy is the price that virtue pays
to vice or the other way around I'll
 it is but your people won't be a
hundred percent compliant but if they're
taken seriously I think they could work
but on the other hand I would love to
see how your approach works I am like
you know fully confessed to being highly
over for more my game a experiences and
listening for the younger generation to
prove me wrong by the right and I
have to fully confess that I'm an
extremist you know I always swing too
far off the deep end so the right the
right way is probably somewhere in the
middle
yeah and we'll figure it out over time
so yeah thanks for a lot for that let's
hop back now a level that review of your
micro solidarity number two and the
various levels the other work actually
when I read it was the reason I reached
out to you to come on the show was a
very interesting higher level medium
article called how to weave social
fabric and it calls out and links to the
micro Sol parity series but it curve
operates at a higher and maybe simpler
level for people to get started with
where you talk about initiators
gatherings and crews maybe want to do a
quick run-through on how to weave social
fabric hmm this is um this is funny
because I wrote that in January with a
plan for how we were initiating a couple
of different congregations so one was
about taking the Inspiral congregation
which I said is centered in Wellington
in New Zealand and seeing if we can
establish a sort of cell division there
you know establish a new core in
somewhere in Europe so there's that kind
of budding new congregation and then
there's a couple of others that I'm
involved with different ways one of them
is a group for Community Builder type
facilitator type people and then there's
another one which is a network basically
of political leaders and activists and
so on so there's a bunch of different
congregations that I'm helping to
establish and we wrote this in January
and the plan was well the first thing
you do is you have a really great
gathering you have a really awesome
meeting where you get everyone
face-to-face for the three or four days
and you kind of you know you make them
fall in love with each other and then
you fill them with a vision and they go
off and do a lot of stuff but then of
course the pandemic kept cuts in and our
plans of having everyone face-to-face
are up in the air you know like we don't
know about travel we don't know about
gatherings so we are now in the re re
hypothesizing re experimenting phase
with can we can we we've social fabric
without having face-to-face time so this
is really uncertain it's a puzzle we're
doing a bunch of experimentation and
I'll keep reporting what I learn along
the way but still I think a lot of the
principles that I named in that blog
post
translate fairly well into a virtual
context so the first one I named the
initiators so to think about who is who
is gonna be in that role of calling
people together you know who's gonna say
I'm gonna you know if it's a
face-to-face gathering I'm gonna book
the venue and invite these people to
come or if it's online similar who's
gonna send out the calendar and like
this is happening and I found it really
useful to think of that within the frame
of hospitality because hospitality has a
lot of people are familiar with
hospitality and the expectations in the
roles that happen with the hospitality
essentially being hosts and guests you
know that the host has some special
responsibilities they have some kind of
empowered role there you know like we'd
say my house my rules but there's also a
sense that the hosts job is to tend to
the needs of the guests and to really
give the guests a great experience so I
find that a really useful frame for
thinking about how to how to address
leadership in this community building
context which is a quite a vexed
question so I think it's really
essential that you have this this yeah
host or co-hosts in the middle and that
the first people that they call to them
the ones that are closest to the core
that you really think about what kind of
qualities you want to see in your
community and invite people they already
exhibit some of those qualities you know
people that you already think have
wisdom or courage or they're very caring
or very generous are very competent or
whatever the qualities that you're
looking for like calling those people
first and and yet giving that getting
that smaller first stage core to some
degree of harmony some degree of
coherence you know like bring them bring
them together first maybe you've got 10
people or 20 people first before leaping
ahead to going let's get 100 people in
the room or 300 people in the room did
start with just establishing some sense
of a shared baseline like this is us
this is what we do this is how we feel
this is our direction that we're heading
in so then yeah then the blog posts they
go on to talk about how we run
gatherings at Inspiral and how I think
there
the practice of our gathering is
absolutely essential to what we're doing
and this is the bit that have a super
experimental when we don't know one way
to think about it is the right kind of
gathering will have this balance between
freedom and form so I think people at
least the kind of people that I'm
connecting with they don't want to have
a huge amount of structure and control
they don't want to feel like they're
going to go to a gathering and every
hour is planned out and there's an
agenda from start to finish there should
be a lot of freedom for spontaneity and
people to do whatever they want and lots
of different things to happen in
parallel and so on and other the other
principle is to to think about the
different relational spaces that you're
creating so there's one space which is
the whole of us like the whole group
when and if it's a small enough group
you can do that sitting in a circle you
know like am sometimes that and spiral
will have a really deep kind of dialog
circle or a story sharing circle where
everyone's sitting in it in the room
together looking at each other seeing
the whole of us and one at a time people
share a story and everyone else is just
going to listen so you cultivate the
sense of wholeness and then spend some
time in the smaller groups so breaking
off into crews so any gatherings that we
run will always have usually we call
them home groups for some reason but you
could call it a pod or whatever you want
to call it but just four or five people
that are having some kind of repeated
connection with each other throughout
the course of their event and then we
have the pairing so finding
opportunities to put people face-to-face
you know sometimes would do things like
walk and talk so you pair up and you
just you go for a walk for an hour and
it's just the two of you going for a
walk and talking and that might be might
be as simple as that or you can do some
more sort of intentional communication
practices about active listening and
speaking from a place of authenticity
and so on and and also I think it's
helpful to make sure that there's plenty
of time for people to spend time on
their own you know which is like I said
the smallest group itself the self and
the dyad because when I go to
conferences which I don't do anymore
except there's a speaker but I used to
go to conferences fairly often and the
best parts for me were the one-on-ones
right where you pick somebody out of the
crowd or they pick you out of the crowd
and you'd go off to a corner during the
break and have some intensely deep
conversation right it's a truism
you know poorly organized conferences
essentially all the value is in the side
conversations and for at least for me
those are often dyadic
so I would put that in there as well if
one we're thinking about such things
let's move on to something closer to
this podcast actually something you and
I have been chittering about on Twitter
a little bit and I'm starting to do some
work on and I think you and I and Jared
are gonna have a conversation about it
offline but we both been seeing Peter
Limburg stoah which seems a nice example
of building community around podcasts
and you know as I said we put together a
little project plan of our own it needs
to be tuned and expanded what are some
of your thoughts on how you know some of
your principles can be applied to
turning podcasts into essentially you
know expanded events that build
community around them mm-hm
this is a really fun question because
it's it's so live it's so emergent right
now and four or five different
conversations simultaneously all with
people that are running podcasts asking
how do they make them less about
broadcast and more about peer-to-peer
community buildings so it's fun I don't
have a strong sense yet of what's the
right plan but there's a lot of
experiments happening in parallel one
when piece of the puzzle I think is that
there's an anti-pattern of podcasts
especially in the game be space and
related sort of since making
intellectual philosophical spaces which
is I'm concerned about an overdoing the
intellect and an under doing the action
you know that there's this all of the
people that you interview on your show
they're brilliant people you know and
it's like every time I can get a new
episode of my favorite podcast and
listen to this person you know wow
they're so smart you know and it's it's
it's really stimulating to listen to
these smart people that can communicate
really clearly and the concern that I
have is that people get into a habit of
just consuming knowledge just listening
to more and more different people and
assembling this sort of like pristine
map of how they think reality works and
maybe they start a little bit to think
about how they might initiate some kind
of community or some project or
something that they're interested
but still they do this thing of like way
over engineering at Nova thinking it and
under practicing under experimenting and
so my energy is to try and interfere
with that tendency and and push people
more towards their agency more towards
their initiative their entrepreneurship
their get up and do it kind of energy so
I'm seeing Peter Lim Berg's platform the
stoah is a really effective example of
someone who had a podcast and now it's
doing everything interactive all the
time and I think that's that's really
brilliant and he's gonna be prototyping
a lot of stuff yesterday I had a
conversation with a podcast they had
some really serious large audience
they have many thousands of people that
very actively engaged already in some of
their community building efforts and
there they came to me with the question
of you know we have these 5,000 people
who are super engaged and now they're
asking about mutual aid funds like
especially in the US you've got people
who are certainly out of work or they've
got these unexpected expenses with the
pandemic and we want to support each
other by sharing money around how do we
do that
and my instinctive answer is the same
that I give to all these people is to
you know like I keep saying focus on the
small scale and also to focus on
experimentation and learning so in their
case it's like my recommendation is
instead of trying to address your 5,000
people is there a way that you can
divide off a hundred or 300 or something
like that and instead of designing the
perfect system for a mutual aid fund
where people can exchange money between
each other tax-free or however it's
going to work don't aim for perfection
just aim for something that's going to
teach you something you know that's sort
of entrepreneurial attitude have just
released something and then make it
better next week and so whatever
commended for them is that they run a
weekly or a two weekly cycle where okay
we're going to do a funding round and
then at the end of that round we're
going to stop and we're going to have
some kind of communal reflection process
where we we go what was good about that
what was not so good what are we going
to do differently next time and use that
you know agile iterative learning
process to just develop the structure
that's right for the context that you're
in
because this is the thing like I have
some degree of expertise in
self-organizing groups but I don't have
any expertise in your context I don't
know who are the people and what kind of
relationships and what kind of culture
they've got and so the right
organizational structure is not going to
come from my ideas right it's going to
emerge from the local context and so
really instituting that practice of
being very rigorous around the learning
and the experimentation like these are
the experiments are running for this
month and then this is the point where
we stop and reflect and see what's going
to go better and yeah like I say it's
probably looking for opportunities to
focus on the small scale so in Peters
case so they've got one thing now that's
just started they call the the metagame
mastermind and that's about it's like a
little crew it's let's like find find
three people that you're going to check
in with every week on your personal
development course I think that's just
like an excellent initiative where they
will have a shared sort of structure a
shared template like this is this is how
we do our mastermind process and anyone
can initiate so if you're listening to
this and you like it then just call out
the two or three of your friends and
here's their you know here's the run
sheet if you want to try it out so I
like the idea of having lots of people
doing that very small gesture of
hospitality that one of saying hey I
want to do this little group thing do
you want to do it with me and then
coalescing those small groups together
into progressively larger groups and I
don't know how that applies in your
context with your with your incipient
community that's about it's a certainly
a question that will cause me to think
alright I can't give you a good answer
off the top of my head but I do believe
that if I approach it from that
perspective that may help illuminate
some good things to do I also like your
towards action in fact one of the things
I call out is on the journey to game be
is that we need to develop a bias
towards action particularly in the
social change movement we do seem to
attract too many people who just love
the talk right and people who do
not love to act and while talking is
good and moves certain kinds of
endeavors forward at the end of the day
you got to pull the trigger
right you got to go out and do something
and so I strongly try to encourage a
bias towards action one of the most
recent things we've done in the game B
space is you know the home
game B Facebook group had gotten
overstuffed with too much philosophical
 and such and so we've now spun
off I don't know a dozen or more
independent subgroups which have their
own mod team which set their own rules
and are typically focused on a much more
narrow topic like parenting or building
sovereignty or education community
building etc and even they're still
somewhat talk shopping but some of them
at least are moving towards action and
you know I do think that you know those
of us who are action oriented night I
see you as a person who's very action
oriented you know need to make sure that
we kind of level up these radical change
organisations away from being talk shops
or navel-gazing and get on with building
the goddamn thing
alright I have to add the other side of
that polarity though because I'm also
connected to a lot of activists which I
will sometimes call action ist's you
know that I just obsessed with doing
action and actually don't have the
process of learning engage there's not a
process of reflection and so there has
to be a balance between those things and
it's why I'm always emphasizing this
institute some kind of rhythm of
retrospective of reflection of learning
like make those learning loops really
explicit and say every week or every
month we have this moment where we stop
and we reflect on the action that we've
done so that you're certainly most of
your energy is going into acting because
that's the way that you learn the most
but you also have to stop for a second
stop doing per second to look around and
go what if we learn from there and then
move again yeah I agree for sure let's
move on to another topic and this is one
of your lesser-known essays on medium
called I will if you will which is this
very interesting idea of making a
conditional commitment so if enough of
us agree to do X you know like a death
strike or or something like that then it
will trigger our mutual commitment to go
forward but if we don't get a critical
mass it won't what more can you say
about that I think you actually called
out some tools and things of that sort
that might be useful for people who want
to self-organize around conditional
commitment
this is funny because I'm an absolute
amateur in this field you know I've done
some stuff with you know technology for
social movements and so I was invited by
some folks from extinction rebellion who
were planning some various conditional
commitment initiatives they said you
know would you would you have some
opinions on us on what we're doing and I
spent a day doing some research and
pulling together some links and seeing
what's out there and talking to my
contacts and so on and did the thing
that I do which is push that all into a
blog post so that I don't have to keep
it in my memory and and just list it out
there to say like this is this is the
state of the art as far as I can tell
from one day of research and some good
conversations with people in the field
and it's it's it's so far outside of my
my day-to-day expertise I think or not
so far but it's not it's not core to
what I know about but the the the
essential principle to me it feels
pretty sound it's got some its there's
been some good examples of people
pulling it off well so that's like yeah
rent strikes a really good example and
those are currently happening especially
in the US all over the place where
people are at least organizing in their
building or an enabler complex with is
one one property owner and if you can go
around the neighborhood whether that's
in person or online and get them to
pledge yeah I need to have these
conditions change or else we're not
going to pay that pay the rent it's very
easy for someone to say I will if you
will that really lowers the threshold of
their of their commitment and once
you've got that critical mass then you
can then you can initiate so there are
some there are some tools the reason I
was doing that research because there
were there were plans for a really
significant debt strike in the UK and
then they backed away from that I think
because I'm not sure exactly it's a bit
foggy but I think it's because the legal
implications of doing this kind of stuff
that to get really serious you know when
you're talking about people default
intentionally taking on debt just so
they can default on just so they can try
and throw a spanner in the works of
finance it's it's it's some really risky
territory so I think they backed out of
that but there I know that some of the
people that have been involved with
extinction rebellion have have run
smaller scale conditional commitment
campaigns with some success so I
definitely yeah I think it's a field
that's right for more experimentation
great I will reveal here now for the
first time that there's a document being
prepared by one of the leading figures
in the game be space not me that will be
proposing a conditional commitment for a
radical reform or Jubilee you pick which
one and we'll have more to say about
that soon so this is I think very timely
and I would point people to Rich's paper
at least as a primer
I'm glad you qualified how far along you
were in that but I found it useful we'll
see where this idea goes I think it has
huge potential it corresponds sort of
using technology and networks to the old
idea of the anarchist the general strike
if you remember that from your anarchist
literature I mean it's a it just has
this kind of a beautiful idea about it
right maybe just you can coordinate all
these people to anticipate some kind of
shared action and they don't have to
expose themselves until there's a
critical mass but they know they can win
that I think I think it's it's really
devious and I really love it and I I'm
excited to hear that game be people have
got something in the works yeah it'll be
interesting you've been playing working
living in this world of self-organizing
work life and culture for number of
years I don't know quite how long but
how do you see it progressing and what
do you think we need to speed up the
transition so that it's just not a few
of us maniacs out on the fringe but it's
large numbers of people it's a great
question it does feel that there's
momentum underway I have a sense that
there's a growing portion of people in
the world that are really dissatisfied
with the status quo and we'll see what
happens with this pandemic with everyone
taking a break from their business as
usual if that I have a sense that that
might shake a few more monkeys out of
the tree that people have have a moment
to stop and reflect on their life and
look at their you know what are they
spending their time on and how does that
relate to their values and maybe it's
not so satisfying
the main obstacle then I see and this is
this is really core to my work I think
is that doing the self-organizing group
thing for starters it's kind of new
maybe it's ancient and we've we've lost
touch most of us have lost lost touch
with the old ways of doing it but for
most of us modern people it's new and
experimental and my view is that there
is no blueprint that you can copy and
expect it to work well and I
the contention that we don't have to
start from a blank slate a blank slate
either I really believe that there are
design patterns that work transcon
textually that you can take from one
place and implement in another place and
and you can't take an entire
organization with with all of their
rules and regulations but I think you
can take some of the practices and some
of them the modules and that's why yeah
you know that the book that I wrote and
now which we've developed into an online
course we call it patterns for
decentralized organizing is to try and
name some of these patterns so so some
of the obvious ones are like decision
making if you're going to work in a
group you're going to have to have some
way of taking decisions and we have
compiled look these are some that we
some decision-making methods that we've
we've seen work really well and these
are our way of doing it we name four
different methods and say like the good
for four different contexts and a mature
group is probably going to be able to
switch between those different methods
in different contexts but you need to
have that shared language like if you're
in a group where everything is done by
consensus or everything is done by just
you know what they call it democracy
like a free-for-all where people do what
they want if that's the only decision
method you've got it's it's not a very
resilient system but if you have
multiple decision methods you're likely
to be able to deploy the right tool for
the job and then we talk about conflict
is another really classic one like new
group start and they're having a great
time and it feels like they're changing
the world and they will love each other
and at some point the honeymoon runs out
and then you have some conflicts and
very very common that a group will
falter or terminate because of a deep
conflict between some of the core people
and this is the kind of thing that you
can anticipate and if you anticipate it
while you're still in your honeymoon and
name some agreements about what are we
going to do when things get tough who
we're going to call on what are like you
would have guiding principles if you can
if you can name some of those things
before it gets tough then when you hit
the difficult time you've got something
to lean back on but if you hit the
conflict and you don't have any
pre-existing structure for dealing with
conflict it's a very difficult time to
invent one right so there's lots of
these kind of patterns that we've been
articulating in our work and the big
frustration that I have is that people
seem to intuitively understand if they
want to do something self-organizing
that they can't really copy a blueprint
and so what happens is everyone is out
there in their own groups failing for
the same reasons they're learning
everything the hard way and a lot of
these kind of obstacles and problems
that we articulate they're sufficient to
terminate a group you know like I think
this this it's maybe eight to ten of
these these core challenges of working
with humans and if you hit any one of
those without the appropriate structure
in place or the appropriate culture or
there without even prepared for it it
can be enough to terminate your group
and so many of these new initiatives get
underway and they they go really well
for six months and then they just
disintegrate and to me it's essential
that we're learning from each other and
so I'm doing my little piece of that
with my partner with our little company
the hum trying to produce training
material you know but there's more to it
than that it's not just about us having
the one true curriculum I think it's
more about learning how do we share
experience of what are we doing in our
groups and what's going well what can we
learn from each other what's difficult
how do we support each other this is one
of the critical success factors of
Inspiral is that we have all of these
small groups and everyone cares about
everyone so like what if your group is
in trouble I'm gonna come over and help
you out and having that community of
peers we're where we are invested in
each other but we're not completely
tightly bound together you know there's
a little bit of distance there creates
an excellent environment for learning
and support so I think that yeah more
peer to peer exchange between these
collaborative groups would go a long way
that's my best guess for now yeah and I
would let me throw out something else to
you they think about cuz I absolutely
agree with you and that's actually my
next topic but my sense if zooming that
this koba nineteen pandemic thing does
not actually crash the system and I
don't believe it will but I think it'll
be a big shock so I don't think this is
the revolutionary moment yet but what I
do think is happening based on talking
to a lot of people over the last six
weeks is that the number of people who
have ears to hear about something
different is been very substantially
increased perhaps by a factor of 10 or
maybe even more you describe
dissatisfied with the status quo or
maybe he just took a break from the rat
race and realized what the hell have I
been doing for the last 15 years what
ridiculous
going to these stupid meetings dealing
with morons who don't know how to
operate a meeting making no or bad
decisions that don't really matter why
do I live this way this is absurd
there's got to be a better way so the
action item I'm taking from this in our
game be world is to perhaps artificially
accelerate the creation of artifacts to
get them in circulation outside of the
inner community for these ears to hear
and you know perhaps in your space a
natural action if I'm correct on
hypothesis I might be wrong I often am
right as I say my ideas are strongly
stated but weakly held the results will
tell us maybe take your patterns for
decentralized organization and get it
done goddamn it and publish it there'll
be a probably at ten times bigger
audience for this in the next nine to
twelve months than there was in the last
nine to twelve months does that make
sense it totally makes sense I know I
have to finish the book I read a bit
with my energies at doing an online
course because that that felt more alive
you know they have have a space where
people can meet each other and learn
together in groups and whether they can
do it together in groups or they can do
it on their own but I I do I know I have
to return to the book and finish it it's
a I have a tendency of moving on to the
next thing you know I like the shiny
shiny I have to say that this emergence
of new potentially at least the
potential emergence of new groups does
double-click on why I'm focused on
practices because you can you can enable
a lot of different groups to use the
same practices even if they have a
different way of describing their values
or their purposes or their principles
and and that's a real shared resource I
think that we can we can curate together
you know so whether it's nonviolent
communication or authentic relating or
circling or stuff that I'm putting
through microcell of arity like there's
a lot of different behaviors frameworks
structures that we can use that that
will replicate very well into different
contexts that's actually a very good
point I had not really focused on that
that practices ought to be more
contagious to use an appropriate word of
the moment than principles right even if
we have opposite principles we can use
the same practices alright let's go on
to our last topic here we're getting
near our time which is this has been
something that was in the game B
playbook from the very beginning but we
never had time for it we were trying to
build our own little movement but I am
now getting outreach from other people
and I'm reaching out to them and this is
what we called the big change movement
to your point there are lots of groups
now that are interested in serious
social change and they're not the same
right you know the the regenerative
ecological people I'm quite close to is
that the same as game B no but is there
overlap for sure I've gotten to know
recently the Hansie branch at least of
the meta modernists not the same some
overlap some serious goals some
differences on method etc and there's
lots and lots more love to know your
ideas about tools protocols and your
word practices on what do you think
should be in place for this big change
movement because we know that we don't
want to corral people into some common
you know set of doctrines but we want
them to be able to share things that
they've learned insights etc without
anybody dominating the other you know so
it's a truly collegial sense that all
together are more than each apart yet
there's no dominance or attempting to
divert anybody from their own trajectory
you know what thoughts do you have for
how one might go about crafting a big
change movement at this point in time I
think with a question like that I can
only answer for my intuition you know
it's it's it's kind of too big a puzzle
to solve rationally my instinctive
position is that we need a drill on the
fundamentals that means thank all this
focus on putting on small groups it
snake we need to have I think we need to
have millions of people in the world
that are ready to mobilize a group of
people to work on their little patch and
and that feel competent to do that and
feel encouraged and supported to do that
well and that they're going to learn
from each other because what I see at
the moment is like you see it you know
way more talk than action and and this
feeling that there's a huge there's a
huge threshold before someone gets
activated and I want to lower that
threshold and make it more of a rare
and that people let's like this move
from from being a podcast audience to
being a podcast community of
peer-to-peer action and mutual aid you
know I think that that's the gesture
that I'm on and and that means doing the
basics like you say learn how to host a
medium you know learn how to how to
organize people and and make decisions
together and get some actions going and
it can be the smallest thing I think the
first phase isn't about how do we turn
the economy upside down
I think the first phase is think how do
we make sure the elder people in our
neighborhood are not going hungry doing
the shopping for their more but you know
like doing doing small gestures that the
purpose doesn't have to be
transformative I think the practice can
be transformative just discovering our
agency and in our ability to work and
function as a collective I think if more
of us were more competent on there then
I wouldn't be so frightened about the
future as I am now
because this is what's motivating my
work is there are so many utopians so
many activists so many people who are
willing to take a break from the status
quo and if you look at them a lot of
them are not very inspiring what they
actually achieve you know a lot of them
fall to pieces a lot of their I mean you
just look at what happened with their
with the communes from the 60s most of
them disintegrated into really horrible
places you know and we've got to take
that seriously that the intention to
start it fresh and do something good and
do something new is not enough we
actually need to have the competencies
to do it well and so my sense is we
should be practicing today and and
developing those muscles and getting
more and more competent to look after
ourselves and their neighbors without
institutional support that's the way
that makes sense to me and and I guess
the other part of what I'm doing is
working out loud so really making a
practice of documenting everything I'm
learning as much as I can
recording conversations in public and
leaving those laying around so that
other people who are on a similar quest
can learn from me as I'm learning from
them I think open sourcing what we're
doing I think game B has been reasonably
good at that there's a lot of surface
area now online about what's happening
in the game B space I think that's
really good but the stage beyond just
open source is thinking in terms of
modularity
and identifying what are the component
parts you call them piece parts that we
can ship and say this is ready this is
good you can use it wherever you are you
know so I mentioned this podcast that
manager that I was talking to you
yesterday who has this 5,000 people who
want to share money I was really happy
to say to them look there is a piece
part for that it's called open
collective comm and it's a really
excellent it's like a charitable
foundation as a service it's a really
excellent way of people pooling money
together and handling all of the the
taxes and the administration and stuff
in a in a transparent way it's it's this
thing that piece is done now we don't
need to replicate it so I think that
takes a particular approach to strategy
and to movement design to think in terms
of modules and make sure that we're
checking them off when and one by one
and not duplicating too much work
all I can say to that is Amen brother I
agree with a hundred percent of what you
just said there and I think that shows
you why rich is one of the two or three
most interesting people I follow on the
Nets and I'd encourage you to do the
same so I'd like to thank you rich for
an extraordinarily interesting 90
minutes here or there abouts and I think
our audience will find this very very
useful
I just wanted to tack on the end that
we've just just today we've decided
we're going to launch the thing called
the micro solidarity practice week and
that's gonna be it's I mean it's
experimental because it's brand-new but
it's happening from May 11th we're gonna
bring a bunch of people together online
and and practice some of this relational
stuff that have to be talking about so
you can go to the Homburg to find about
that and and I also wanted to say thank
you Jim and not just thank you for
interviewing me but the work that you're
doing I think is really it's really
essential and the way that you're
showing up and you could be in the phase
of your life where you're retiring and
quietly shuffling off to one corner but
instead you're raising your voice and
giving a platform for others and I think
it's really really really excellent
contribution so I'm really grateful to
be part of it
oh well thanks I think we're all in this
together and we're all doing what we can
a min production services and audio
editing by jarred Jane's consulting
music by Tom Muller at modern space
music com