[Music]
[Music]
so hello there my name is Andrew sweetie
and I'd like to talk to you today about
a few things primarily I want to put in
my two cents worth about the Sam Harris
Jordan Peterson debates and I haven't
made a video for a while because mostly
mmm I think my strong point is writing
rather than communicating in this
fashion but that doesn't mean I don't
want to try to experiment with this
medium and really learn how to speak in
front of a camera because it's not an
easy thing to do
so thank you for your patience I've got
a new microphone I'm going to try to
make podcasts I have a few conversations
coming up with some very interesting
people so if you like this
feel free to support me on patreon so
that I can make it much more
professional and slick and fun and all
that so so firstly I'd like to share
some of my thoughts about the bootlegs
right of the Jordan Peterson Sam Harris
debates okay and I've written three
articles on medium about it and I've
been thinking about this sort of thing
for years and I'm thinking about this
phenomenon of the New Atheists mmm why
they're extremely compelling to a lot of
people and why I think ultimately
they're wrong wrong while being right
about a lot of things so that's my
position that's that's where I take my
stand the person who I think so far has
articulated this most interestingly is
Jonathan pazzo in his on his YouTube
site symbolic world
where he like Jordan Pearson talks about
the fact that we live in a symbolic
universe as much as a materialistic
concrete one okay
so Jordan Peterson has a very
interesting take on religion and it's a
very novel one and it's not strictly
speaking I don't think theological he
doesn't speak that much about belief in
God and he doesn't he doesn't try to
prove the existence of God in any kind
of theological sense he talks about God
in terms of its psychological primacy
you could say in our world so he's tried
to talk about religious actions from a
psychological point of view and
sometimes he dips into metaphysics but
most of the time he talks about
neuroscience and myth and this whole
rich burnout rich literature and the
psychological themes of this literature
and why let's say the the archetypes
okay of you know Christian Christian
archetypes and the archetypes of ancient
religion in general are not only deep
they're they're absolutely essential on
the other hand he does this without
necessarily any kind of membership to
any church or Dogma or any and he
doesn't have he's not speaking from the
point of view or the authority of any
particular church so that's that's
that's kind of interesting and it
interests me because the much of the the
books on his reading list of books that
I read as he as a young man Nietzsche
Dostoevsky George Orwell these kind of
books I was passionate about as a young
person and I also felt very that that
what was happening in the universities
wealth somehow
separated from my my real interests
which were those particular writers
especially Carl Jung
because Carl Jung very quickly changed
me from being an atheist into being
someone interested in religion this this
happened was a very young person I read
his biography and it just it just blew
up in my mind in other words I became
less interested in you know critiquing
the church and not necessarily wanting
to become a member of any church but but
still wanting to - still acknowledging
that there's something deep in
archetypal view of this archetypal view
of the world so one thing I think that's
very interesting about Peterson's
discussion and it's interesting that the
person he uses right - - to make us his
points as Nietzsche and Nietzsche was
perhaps the most virulent you know
vociferous critique of of Christianity
ever he almost despised Christianity so
I think what Peterson is doing here is
he's taking the greatest critique of the
Christian Church and try to understand
that and and and not since steel Manning
the entire let's say post Nietzsche
world and seeing the the the you know
the the the positive aspects of that
this might have something to do with the
fact that he's talking to - sam harris
who's sam harris is probably the most
articulate proponent of atheism even
though I will argue over and over again
that sam harris is somewhat has a
somewhat suspicious kind of position
which he has one foot in religion and
one foot out of it so he's he's very
he's very attached to his his atheism
and he's made a whole career on it and
yet he wants to keep the nice positive
aspects of religion which i think is a
sneaky move but anyway the interesting
thing about Peterson's discussion of God
is he's trying to actually think through
it right he's not just accepting it I'm
faith so he's he's he's thinking through
what what this this concept of God means
and its primacy you know in the culture
and in our lives and the fact that you
know we haven't somehow been able to get
rid of God as a concept right it just
keeps coming back and it seems like the
more that we push this concept the way
the more it comes up in in pathological
forms and we could see that with the new
atheist movement which is against God
but but really is is makes science into
a god and science is God in the sense
that science is the highest thing right
it's the most it's the way to the truth
okay and then traditionally you know God
has been the way to the truth so now God
is people like Sam Harris are trying to
replace God with rationality and science
on the other hand people like Peterson
and John and Padua argued that the logos
right or the word huh or you know logic
or the original impulse of human beings
- well Peterson says make habitable
order from chaos is is actually where
science and empiricism and rationality
sprung from that you know this
scientific revolution didn't come out of
nowhere right
it came out of you know millennial of
sort of thinking about these questions
of what it means to be human being and
what is truth of course science as we
know it didn't exist when the Bible was
written and the Bible it was was I guess
and and other stories and traditional
religious stories were and still are in
some ways about value right and not
about objective fact about what matters
and these little stories right contain a
kind of wisdom that is that reveals
itself through time and and there's sort
of no bottom to a story like Cain and
Abel mmm or the Genesis story or the
Christian story these stories and other
stories and different religions contain
perennial you know Troost and they're
not the kind of truth that is precisely
dogmatic it doesn't say this is the way
it is it says the fact that's it it's in
the form of a story means it's in the
form of an exploration
it's a journey it's not that's not it's
not a final answer and that's why it's
it's worthwhile whether you are you know
an Orthodox believing type of person or
just an intelligent person you know to
to become literate literate in the Bible
and and and other other great stories
because these stories are foundational
and I think that's I think that's pretty
hard to argue with but people of course
do so i you know i i've you know exposed
myself since i'm not a pure christian
although i feel a real affinity to the
christian religion to different sorts of
interpretations of the body
of Christianity and 1:1 in Judaism
interests me somewhat and and I find it
rather similar to Peterson's view and so
I just want to throw this out there
uh-huh
I was listening to this sort of very
non-orthodox wild kind of Jewish mystic
and he was saying that in Judaism
there's this idea that we have to save
God right and it's a very different idea
than the Christian idea where God is
this perfect you know being that we have
to you know imitate rather that the
human the human the human goal is
actually that God okay in the early
stories is is you know he's he's he's he
behaves in ways that are brutal right
and he he's not necessarily
compassionate and he perhaps hasn't
become perhaps the fact that he is
created man says something about God
right because man is such a flawed
creature therefore is God flawed maybe
God has actually schizophrenic so this
is one interpretation which might seem
sort of wild that the God is it's a
crazy God and it's it's it's human
beings job to heal God but I find that
somewhat similar to Peterson's view that
you know we need to take responsibility
rather than just sit around and wait to
be saved and I think this also has
something to do with a tradition that
I'm more familiar with Buddhism and I
think Buddhism is much more about you
know liberation
through practice uh-huh then then then
waiting for grace but of course both
those things are important in grace and
liberation so grace would be what would
grace be what's the definition of grace
a definition of grace is simply well you
could say that the fact that you know
there's words coming out of your mouth
the fact that you know the color red the
fact that there's this world of
potential and beauty around us okay and
we can align ourselves with that and
that's grace so there's grace and and
then there's you know responsibility
which means unlike what Sam Harrison
says you know he makes this sort of
argument against free will that you know
there is some sense that it's our job to
align ourselves with the deeper
archetypes so and what are archetypes
it's a good question because are they
the same thing as platonic forms for
example I think the Petersons definition
of archetypes is very interesting you
said archetypes are limits they're a
limit there's some kind of ultimate
potential that you can't go any further
than so for example Satan is a limit of
evil purity it's it's like pure evil
it's the archetype of Satan and then the
archetype of Christ is the archetype of
the self-sacrificing hero that is only
love right so that's so they we have
these you set up these ultimate
possibilities and then you as a human
being exists within that within that
symbolic world of possibilities right
you have the possibility to fall very
far into hell right if you started to
you know snort cocaine on a regular
basis you could or you could fall into
hell right and if you whereas if you
dedicated your life to to helping other
people you might find you have
discovered a world of incredible you
know meaning and which is like the
kingdom of heaven or which is like the
City of God on the hill or whatever you
want to call it okay so Peterson's
argued that you know this God you know
this God principle is essential
regardless of our beliefs right that we
need this higher view or we need
something above us and we just as we
need to be reminded that there's
something below us it's like I was
thinking about this
you wouldn't want if you went to a court
of law you wouldn't want a judge right
you wouldn't want this person to be
responsible for your fate if you've done
something bad you would want something
higher to be responsible for your fate
you know you would want the law right to
be responsible for your fate if it was
just human beings without any higher
principles we'd probably just tear
ourselves to pieces it would seem and we
can observe all of the 2007 20th century
revolutions where people have attempted
to build a utopian society based on the
five-year plan and reason and all that
and it's been a catastrophic failure in
in every sense right and even before
that in the French Revolution
you know the idea was that this archaic
superstition that revolution you know
that religion represented had to be
totally destroyed and so so somebody
told me that where I live in Paris there
was a time where you know the neighbors
were complaining because there was so
much beheading going on you know and
this beheading is an interesting sort of
metaphor right you know if you separate
rationality
from the larger body of reality just and
you become this sort of rational person
where everything is us to have this
logical rational reason you're sort of
like the severed head in a way like
you're not connected with the deeper
metaphysical mythological mythopoetic
substructure right of reality so we can
see that this attempt to build a society
based on reason it just simply doesn't
work and because we're not rational
we're not reasonable and we never will
be and you can't just
we're always governed by these sort of
you know deeper fields of of action
which are old and and we become
possessed we become possessed by
ideology by ideologies by by desires by
all kinds of things which were not in
control of an irrational sense so
there's this thing called you know
William Blake has talked about the deep
code and the deep code of the West was
what he said it was the Bible and it's
funny that I was listening to Eric
weinstein who was an atheist and he
wrote only archetypes of the kind found
in religion are sufficiently deep to
explain why human beings behave the way
they do so I often wonder I want to ask
him so then why don't why are you not a
believer why are you at atheists at the
same time why why can't you take that
extra step that would be my question for
AK Weinstein though at least Eric
Weinstein acknowledges the deeper
function of religion so what I found
astonishing I guess about Peterson is
that he's offering religious myth and
saying it's a value to both the atheist
and the believer okay what does is is is
is interesting it's interesting that an
atheist cancer
start to study these things and perhaps
there is some honesty in being an
atheist right if you don't really have
any kind of religious feeling or why
would you believe stuff you know on yet
though on this higher authority I
remember C Mon veil this this French
philosopher saying that she was an
atheist and then she had this vision of
Christ and he she became a Christian
right but she said she wouldn't have got
to the point of becoming a good you know
a real Christian she didn't have the
deep skepticism and critical mind that
that allowed her to get to that point
where you know her I guess her rational
mind could collapse and a deeper spirit
could could enter her when I hear
Richard Dawkins scoff at the idea there
are fairies in the garden I want to say
you're committing the same error as
religious fundamentalists who take the
Bible stories literally you are a
fundamentalist if you say there are no
fairies in the garden of course there
are fairies in the garden okay
fairies are you know X are you know
mythological metaphysical states of
beauty perhaps mischievousness I don't
know a lot about fairies but perhaps
they do exist and how do you know they
don't if you are really empirical
perhaps you might admit to the
possibility that something exists that
you can't you know fit in your own
limited way of seeing there's there's
vastly different ways of seeing the
world and yes as Jonathan paggio said in
a recent video
the Tooth Fairy does exist Santa Claus
does exists and angels and devils and
all these things do exist in what way
they exist is is is a very deep and
interesting question which I won't talk
about here but at least we could say
that they exist in the sense of
for at the minimum so metaphor symbolic
truth okay
non material truth love for example okay
it should not be conflated with the
observation of objective facts okay we
need to observe objective facts at the
function but it's certainly not the
entire spectrum of human experience and
it's a very limited part of it
in fact we live in the world of well
Peterson would say we live in the world
of values of meaning not merely things
objects okay the word ration means to
cut things into pieces right we ration
things into pieces this is what we do
with our left brain we this is what
allows us to have language this is
fantastic right but if you remain just
within that ration rationing of things
you get this fragmented world it's
completely fragmented it has no nothing
holding it together so no wonder people
go crazy when you try to violently rip
you know fabric of society out from
under them like like they did in the
mouse revolutions and stealth and you
know Stella nice revolutions and any
kind of atheist revolution seems to have
that sort of effect that doesn't mean
there is not some kind of authentic
atheism I I think there is but the angry
atheists are fundamentalist
fundamentally that they really are they
they have this belief in rationality
they have this faith in rationality they
have this view of the world which which
just will cannot be shaken
so anyway I think that I think also we
could say that how do we find truth well
first we have intuition we have
conjecture we we we don't really know
where we're going we enter out into
chaos so these stories like the warring
brother is the devouring mother dad the
tyrannical father the quest for the Holy
Grail the hero's journey you know all
these are sort of you know they don't
spell everything out they they are they
you can they are sort of endless in in
how you can interpret them and and what
they can reveal to you
you know the dragon is symbolizes chaos
the fairy might symbolize the capacity
of imagination all these things have
deep deep deep symbolic meaning they
don't come from nowhere and they they
they come prior to the articulation of
Russian rationality you know they they
are they are brought to the world
through symbols and we live in symbols
even when we say dog a dog is just a
symbol for something that is much more
complicated than our mental image of a
dog it would make our brains explode you
know if we could really see how the
totality of this thing called a dog you
know this is why people go nuts on on
LSD or or whatever because perhaps they
get a glimpse into into complexity
dragons fairies dogs are real and
they're just as real as atoms molecules
DNA perhaps or even more real in terms
of our actual lived experience so in
terms of the Christian story it's
interesting that that you know one thing
I've noticed about Peterson's discussion
of Christ is he doesn't talk about
Christ as a savior but as a hero and you
know you usually hear about Christ as
Savior I guess it's the same thing in a
sense but it's just another way to look
at it
so is Christ a person well that's
another question I don't know if I'm
able to answer its Christ the ultimate
archetype for self-sacrifice you know I
think Peterson's emphasis is on
imitation of Christ rather than sitting
around waiting for Christ to save you
right but again these things you know
you know I don't know if we become saved
in the sense of existentially healed
until we we take a step towards healing
ourselves or saving ourselves so the
there's also an interesting fact I think
in Peterson's writing is that he he's
the kind of secular preacher he's taking
this evangelical charisma in the sense
to his lectures and he can and he talks
about science and reason and that kind
of thing so he's able to integrate
science and reason he's able to
integrate modern view and to something
that is passionately alive and engaged
you know if you go and watch a people in
a Baptist Church you might think they're
bloody insane but there's something
alive about this possession by the Holy
Spirit and speaking in tongues and and
all of this which the modern and merely
rational a man may be he understands a
lot of things intellectually but maybe
he doesn't have this direct heart
connection with with rapturous estatic
or deep experiences so so yeah we need
this you know we need you know modernity
and we need to use our rational minds to
the best of our ability but we also need
to experience there's a hunger in human
being for transcendental deeper you know
experiences to step into a state that is
beyond the ego
or the self-image or our limited
perception of reality into something
greater there's this guy named Richard
Kearney who had this idea called
antitheism and it's the idea that
antitheism is is is an idea for those
who have moved away from God like
they've become atheists and then come
back right
so they recover God after losing God
which is very interesting and perhaps
it's actually part of the Christian
story you know Jesus sort of he's on the
cross and he says why have you forsaken
me he's become you become an angry
atheist for a moment and then you know
you know so so he loses his faith in God
right and so perhaps his loss of faith
and this loss of meaning in this loss of
dimension is a necessary stage that the
culture has to go through before they
can find it again so do we really need
the God principle well depends what you
mean by God as Peterson says over and
over again and I really like that cuz
he's not giving us a cliche answer he
has this long list of stuff to say I
think I have one of his definitions of
God here God is truthful speech logos
that rectifies pathological hierarchies
and confronts chaos of being itself and
generates habitable order a
transcendental reality that is only
observable o'clock across the longest
iteration timeframes God is how we
imagine and collectively represent the
existence and action of consciousness
across time as the most real aspects of
existence manifests themselves across
the longest time frames but are not
necessarily apprehensible as objects in
the here now and now so what does that
mean
it's complex and I don't know I could
give you an answer but then in the
debates between Harrison and Peterson
Harris comes in and says excuse me
Jordan but is this also the God that
says you can't masturbate so you could
see that Peterson has a very he has
about 12 different definitions of God
and Harris has only one and his one
definition of God is like the bad father
right the the guy who's the the the one
who gives you rules that you don't want
to follow the one who you know the the
tyrant that's that's that's God for for
poor Harris it's the God who says you
can't have fun you can't masturbate that
there are rules and regulations and and
you have to follow them to lead a good
life and you know traditional religion
you know and Harris straw man's
traditional religion he takes the worst
aspects of it and continually gives
examples of Scientology of Isis of
Jehovah's Witnesses of the Mormons
you know the bad Mormons whatever you
know anything that you know he um it's
interesting I was thinking that he's
criticizing the new religions right and
the new religions are usually religions
that have sort of you know been twisted
by modernity that you know by people who
think that they can create their own
religion and sam harris is that kind of
a person he's the guy who thinks he can
create his own religion and his religion
is about reason and love that's what he
says right reason and love right but
reason and love you know is that's
really the two wings of logos and you
know and Gaby I don't know why I forget
that the terms but that's very deep
traditional Christianity is talking
about anyway I want to say Sam listen
we're religious we're really just people
we are
even if you don't believe in God you
watch the World Cup and people get
hysterical or just try having a
conversation with the people who watch
waking up with sam harris the podcast
they will go bonkers on you
the angry atheists will attack you with
youtube comments because they're very
virulent there they're on fire with
their belief and rationality and reason
that we're gonna somehow escape from the
dark ages through science and reason and
all that but it's it's it's a rather
naive view it's again Sam's attack of
religion is exactly what he says it is
when he was steel Manning Jordan
Peterson's view a shooting fish in a
barrel if you make the barrel
sufficiently small and narrow it's so
easy right it's so easy to you know go
through history and and and you know
talk about the excesses totally next
excesses of religion and see how they
operate today as well and then come to
the conclusion that all religion is bad
you know say that you know life sort of
began in the Enlightenment Western Amman
light invented all these people in the
axial age like Buddha Confucius Plato
Jesus you know and and and then
thousands tens of thousands of years
before that people who have been trying
to live communally together and you know
have been working with religious
archetypes so you can't just sweep that
all the way and we've tried that in it
it hasn't worked so the kind of secular
spirituality morality morality which sam
Harris thinks is desirable can only
happen in and if you have a set of
axioms collective practices and poetic
enactments and that would have to be
religion our you could call it something
else if you want but
so Sam Harris is self-contradictory he's
a fundamentalist and he his relentless
attack on religion is a historical it's
facile certainly he's the only one of
the new atheist who believes their
transcendental states only he refuses to
acknowledge the the context in which
they were they were born the proof he
discards the teachers and the lineage
and that whole rich mythopoetic s--
right what he wants his religion based
on his own authorities on human human
authority
so Jordan Peterson has about 25
different definitions of God and and you
know for him God is a working principle
and something to be in awe and afraid of
just for the fact of creation I suppose
whereas Sam Harrison has is talking
about a very different God that and it's
the kind of God that nobody really
believes in not even a smart 16 year old
so we agree with Sam that it's worth
attacking biblical literalism and
fundamentalism and everybody knows that
you know maybe these laws from the Iron
Age the hand chopping and all that we
don't want that you know we want to be
able to criticize that and we know that
religion has this pathologies but you
know science also has its pathologies it
has its hydrogen bombs so we need to go
beyond both this literalism in science
right that there's only things and this
religious literalism where you interpret
you know the Bible and an extremely
literal literal way right it's you know
you throw away evolution
and although we've learned in the modern
world my thesis and what I've understood
about having thought of this for some
time is that the new atheists have
created a religion unconsciously uh-huh
but it's a religion they talk about
being saved by reason they have martyrs
they worship martyrs Christopher
Hitchens Galileo whoever they wear long
write robes they have costumes they get
together in stadiums for you know I said
they static recognition of reason the
god of reason there's all these new
atheist priests out and they don't say
they're priests right because they're
better than that but they're still
priests Richard Dawkins has a summer
camp and he in the summer camp they
tried to explain to people that there's
really no such thing as Santa Claus the
Tooth Fairy and and all those things are
just childish you know myths and we have
to grow up and become rational and that
the scientific method is the only one
way to to get to the truth well Sam
Harris doesn't see that precisely he
says oh yeah you know the stories are
nice
the songs are nice he makes very light
of those things he you never hear him
talk about literature or poetry or art
or music or at least in the most
reductive reductionist ways because he's
he's completely entrenched in this
scientific scientism in this ideology of
scientism so he's at the same time he's
cute he's a curious guy and he's gone
and met religious teachers he's met you
know great buddhist sages you know and
traditionally when you when you meet a
great teacher you bow down to them in
you you you you say please give me the
teachings and then you practice these
teachings and it takes
and then you learned something but sam
harris goes and meets them and he says I
like this part and I'm gonna keep this
and then you can you can keep all the
rest it's a very arrogant you know point
of view it's like the the the adolescent
who just won't admit that he has parents
right he's angry about his parents he's
angry about all the bad things as
parents does so he says I have no
parents I feel it's it's not a mature
view of the world because if a mature
view of the world involves recognizing
that there are things greater than you
so there's something empty in this
disembodied merely rational vision of
spirituality it's like the entire myth
of poetics and I don't I said this word
before cuz I like it myth or poetics
that's myth and poetry it's this rich
symbolic lore you can't just throw it
away meaning has always been the realm
of spirit right not the realm of
measurement not the realm of numbers not
the observation of physical systems that
belongs to science and science is fine I
have no problem with science but to
reduce religion to scientism strips the
poetry and the spiritual endeavor and
and and you just have techniques
meditation techniques that's what sam
Harris you know teaches we have to
meditate right meditation techniques
so Peterson's trying to make build a
bridge turn a Peter cinn to - you know
from religion - from let's say his
training and biology and evolutionary
biology to the great truths of religion
which is a which is he says that what
he's adding to this Jungian business of
archetypes he's adding the biological
element and so I think that's very
fascinating and but it's not it's not
actually new most of the earliest
scientists were pretty religious you
have Hildegard the big din you have
Francis Bacon you have Isaac Newton you
have Joanna's Kepler they were all
religious okay
and the new atheist would say oh yeah
that's because if they weren't religious
they would be killed and well maybe
maybe not the inconvenient fact is that
modern science was born from a
consciousness igniting itself through
religious structures and practices and
nobody believes in the God that sam
harris doesn't believe in i except for a
few crazy well maybe a lot of crazy
people but you know if you're if you're
having a discussion with educated you
know modern modern people you know you
can talk on their level the Harris that
God is the God that Harris is talking
about is the God of Isis and Scientology
it's the god of modern deracinated
religions as if they represented the
entire history of all religion he puts
them all in the same soup it's just an
easy game to play it's the God who
doesn't want you to masturbate it's the
God who has all these bad rules it's the
God of the bad consciousness and yes
there have been many many murderous
religious dogmas over the Iron Age and
is this the entire phenomenology of
religion well religion has some nice
music
you know O'Hara says yes but we don't
need all that other stuff we don't need
any kind of laws but in fact you do need
loss you do need rules you do need
borders you do need you know ways to
understand reality you can't start from
a tabla rasa state and you know if you
looked at Maoist China you see these are
not enormous statues of Mao it's
obviously when you when you tear apart
the traditional religion the secular
religion moves in and that's something
that's not very pretty and also is much
more murderous you know atheism wins the
the the award for mountains of corpses
for for amount dead dead you know this
this atheism atheist religion so you
know legalism dogma this is only one
aspect of religion but if you listen to
Haris you think that religion and that's
all that there is in religion yeah there
but there's many many interpretations of
religion many many uh-huh some some are
even saying the goddess is not as an
illusion I'll let you investigate what
those are that there's actually two
Taurus and then Judaism ah there's the
Torah of laws and that's a punishment
because people don't really want to meet
God directly and that there's actually
something else called the spiritual
Torah and that's when you speak directly
to the divine there are ideas like that
there is an exoteric you know an outer
part to the religion and an esoteric an
inner part to the religion and there are
levels of essa' terrors there are
different levels you know and there is
vastly complex and deep so we maybe we
need some laws to help govern our
society like you know don't masturbate
you know too much
you might become a bit depraved and you
know we need laws like we need traffic
lights you know otherwise people crash
into each other so there are laws and
some of these laws are a bit archaic and
it's unfortunate but that's not all
there is to to let's say spirituality
and religion religion yes it can be a
deadening formal monstrous for us but it
can also be in a liveing for us it can
also save people it saves their souls
you know it's it's like religion the
function of religion is in many ways to
save people from themselves from their
own ego mania and if we don't have that
then how are you going to save yourself
from yourself sometimes your rationale
rational mind is not the answer
sometimes you have to invoke things that
are beyond yourself whatever that is and
you know at a certain point language
doesn't go there we can't hardly talk
about it but you know people have been
experiencing religious experiences since
the beginning of time and and they
always will and and these experiences
are usually described in poetry because
they can't be described in words it
can't be described in law but through
logical systems of analysis and there's
a range also a range of practices you
know from virtue practices to inner yoga
practices to prayer to all kinds of
imaginative collective activities
to invoke and invite divine forces into
human beings and if you look at the best
I just thought of basketball for some
reason you know you know human beings
are capable of nearly you know divine
activities and they're also capable of
the most terrible demonic activities so
I think the idea of God and the devil is
appropriate and accurate on a
metaphorical level at least so when I
was practicing Zen I had a as n master
and he he said he asked me this thing he
gave me this Khan you know and cones are
sort of riddles you have to answer but
you don't answer them in an irrational
intellectual way you have to answer them
with your whole being and he asked me
where is God so he wasn't trying to tell
me that draw a picture well maybe if I
drew a picture maybe the divine could be
present in that but he was he was posing
not as as a : as a question I think
Peterson does that I don't think he
gives us a Dogma to work with which is
which is quite refreshing and I think
it's driving people back into
investigations of religion and that's
that's great
it might even be driving him back to
church but the net effect in any case to
me is is very good so maybe God is like
a Zen Cohen maybe maybe Peterson's God
is somewhat Cohen like that's why he
won't give you a definition and he won't
pretend to know
so again I want to say that guys like
Sam Harris are priests you know in a way
they're secular priests they're
preaching to people and they're offering
this Ark of reason this vessel you know
this this holy vessel to protect us from
the flood right and that's it and
they're warning us you know the waters
are rising and we need to believe and
have hope and rationality and reason is
the good news and and and we could get
illuminated and everything we fear is
outside of reason about is outside that
that world that we can describe you know
they're building the Church of
rationality and in that church we will
build a world of limit us well-being and
reasonableness you know religious
metaphors abound with in the philosophy
of Sam Harris and and they deify
rationality and rationality that there's
been ancient cults of materialism and
rationality and there are a continuation
of this Church of rationality it's
almost humorous to notice how highly
unreasonable and defensive they get in
the YouTube comments when you you
question they're quasi religion they
make straw man effigies you know of the
devil the burn and they tell us that
we're going to be safe and in this
prescribed rational world the world we
can name analyze describe is if that's
all there were they tell us to believe
in human reason have faith in the
scientific method they've built this
wall I say it's like the Mormon temple
in Utah they're like the most virulent
bible thumpers
there they don't notice they've absorbed
this religious substructure and
fundamentalist few it's in their
language and their beliefs and their
ethics it's not even bad faith when it
comes to it to Sam Harris I believe he's
in good faith
he's just monological he's nearly
impossible to break through you know
it's the same sort of spell that he
accuses the religious fundamentalists of
being subject to they again he takes the
Bible literally he's not going to
abandon his atheist family's belief
system you know some people need Jesus
for security but we could replace Jesus
with science according to Sam Harris
science is the highest the most
important the most meaningful we have to
have faith in Him science science is
Jesus it's a sir sam harris goes and
dips his toes in the waters of mysticism
but he won't but remains there and the
shire or the his hobbit hole of ideology
you know there's a hysterical need for
order and control innocence thinking he
bulldozes over any nuance he'd like the
world to be reasonable good luck with
that you like the world to be less
religious well that's too bad because
man is religious by nature even the art
and atheist you know even atheism has
its religiosity rather extreme these
days and and you know
there's this cult of materialism it's a
cult and it always has been because
human beings make cults you know and a
healthy cult is perhaps a religious
community and an unhealthy cult is is
it's one with a skewed ideology which
tends to manipulate people but we have
to go as Peterson says outside the walls
of ideology where we find the anomalous
the surprising the unexpected there's
danger there but there's a call to
adventure we find allies and fellow
travelers outside the walls we find
dragons and Dark Riders we find maybe
even a princess you know Sam Harris does
not like to speak in these terms but he
does anyway we cannot be fully rational
in control right if we remain too much
in our heads in the realm of analysis we
can't really experience life fully
that's why we just that's why there are
stories you know literary tropes
metaphors this bypasses the rational
part of the brain yeah the merely
rational brain it rations again I said
there's this again it's like you cut off
cut up things into parts like the way
you dissect a pig fetus in biology class
our left brain language oriented
rationality is necessary for mapping but
do you want to make a map as big as the
world do you want everything to be
within the domain of rational analysis
we're not saying that rationality is not
important essential that we don't need
to sharpen our intellectual rational
analytical mind but the heart has its
reasons so do the guts we have to we
have embodied modes of understanding art
music literature dance religion mere
rationality is is a fear-based
philosophy and fear leads the mind to
the most elaborate crystal mind palaces
but which are easily blown over by a
strong wind and doesn't this faith in
rationality fall apart in difficult
circumstances you know we believe we're
pretty rational until something serious
happens you know when somebody dies or
when we're dying when we're faced with
this ultimate uncertainty we we need
ways to read to reach for resources
beyond just our merely rational mind you
know this is what this dark night of the
soul reveals to us that in this
fragmented mental landscape you know
that we wander through in the direction
of something more whole our Empire of
dirt is the inanimate world of merely
mental constructs severed from the world
of feeling in actions and religion myth
and story are our intermediate
sense-making modes threshold there's
this journey to embodiment and religion
that's in its told in mythological
poetic terms ulysses the inferno of the
Bible Alice in Wonderland
these are all mirrors for reality
they're straight they're strange because
they accurately represent the
phenomenology you know of our experience
more than any microscope can I was
listening to the song hurt by Trent
Reznor right actually the Johnny Cash
version which is a masterpiece and it's
a masterpiece because it's it's almost
like a pure prayer coming from a dying
man it's it's it's confessional he's
speaking of redemption in the face of
his own his own death he's looking at
his creations and seeing how they're
nothing right his his Empire of dirt
right you know they don't matter and
unless the spirit is alive still in them
and unless one is in connection to
something deeper than mere things so
such religious questions are not that
the main of science they're the domain
of philosophy and religion so there's a
paradox to this again this cult of
Reason you know it considers the mind to
be the sort of magic box that makes any
kind of argument right you can can make
you can construct any kind of argument
you can solve any problem you know the
transhumanists are trying to solve the
problem of death to make us live forever
you know but the trouble is there's
always a miscalculation somewhere you
know you can't order life to to your
will things happen beyond our best
intentions and even scientific
discoveries you know which begin in the
intuitive mind right they begin in the
intuitive mind so even even they they
come from some kind of leap of faith
some kind of unreasonable intuition and
where does that come from we don't know
so I seem to have to repeat again that
I'm not against rationality science
logic clear thinking our saying that
there are no
indispensable there's just a limitation
to rationality in isolation and there
are other modes of knowing rather than
merely conceptual ones so when the
floods of irrational experience come the
rational mind it might not be able to
help us so actually the wild visions
that you read and in the book of
revelations of the Tibetan Book of the
Dead or these these crazy texts right
they're actually a more phenomenological
precise description of our experience
then we'd like to believe there's a
there's a phenomenological precision
there there's the rational mind can
provide reasons and explanation from
things but these unreasonable images
somehow speak to our deeper nature and
of course when we're deeply engaged in
the world the rational concepts are a
background phenomenon although they
disappear there they're not what matters
and we're not always rational we fall in
and out of rationality where we become
disoriented dying or Eagle dissolves we
experienced this in dreaming or even
when we're walking down the street some
irrational thing might come to us come
to our minds it's it's the stuff
bubbling up from the unconsciousness but
if we will if we are truly empirical you
know we would not discount such
phenomenon we would not just remain
within the waters of ordinary
conceptuality we'd might dive into these
experiences in that in a different way
so
making habitable order from chaos is one
of Peterson's tropes but he also warns
of too much order too much rationality
right the French Revolution was an
attempt to try to bring logic and reason
to the world but this logic and reason
was represented by this gut this vicious
goddess who severed all these people
that you know so we have a world of
headless people there's no limit right
to the mind right to what we can
fabricate to what we can create with
reason and we can reason the most
terrible atrocities right
the example Peterson uses is from crime
and punishment mm-hmm or is it notes
from the underground no crime and
punishment
yes crime and punishment so the main
character arrests Skolnick it cost
I think he's called he has perfect
reason an absolutely perfect reason to
murder a woman but somehow that's not
right somehow he's become a victim of
his own rational mind and this makes in
mono he's not seeing the whole picture
and the whole picture is there are
consequences and there are forces and
there are things in life which we cannot
put into our box of reason so this is
what I've my critique of sam Harris is
he wants to put everything in the box of
reason but everything won't fit in that
box you know you can almost admire his
dedication right to this to this project
that he has but it's a dubious project
and unfortunately sam Harris has really
just went to mentalists in my view and I
I was inspired and and I got this point
of view from a video of by Jonathan
paggio which you can which I'll put in
the links below this video and also put
something there's also some links to my
patreon site if you want to help me with
this with this channel because I'm going
to try to make a podcast and I am going
to try to talk to people and I'm going
to try to prove production value but
your help is is is most appreciated and
anybody wants to help me get this thing
off the ground please be in touch and
thank you for listening to these
ramblings