[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis last time I suppose I
probably taxed your attention quite a
bit because we got into I tried to keep
it as accessible as possible it's jargon
free as possible but we got into some of
the nitty-gritty of how we could
potentially give a naturalistic
explanation of relevance realization and
see it potentially in being implemented
in terms of self-organizing criticality
and small world network formation in the
brain and that that in turn could help
us to understand general intelligence
insight and a lot of the functionality
and I'm it was even arguing a lot of the
phenomenological aspects of
consciousness and that gives us right
reason to believe that we may be able to
use this machinery to elegantly explain
a lot of the central features of human
spirituality we've already seen that
this relevance realization is changed
active it's about our fundamental
connectedness connectedness to the world
connectedness of mind body together will
have to come back to connectedness to
other people that it that relevance
realization is always deeply affective
that at the core of relevance
realization is a caring that goes is
integral to your cognitive commitment of
your precious cognitive metabolic and
temporal resources that we can see a lot
of the stuff that Heidegger was talking
about when he was trying to get us back
to this primordial sense of meaning in
the trans jetty of relevance realization
and that that interpretation of
Heidegger
via Dreyfus and our our being in the
world I want to pick up on that now
instead of just being suggestive I want
to now try and uncared for
what I want to call the phenomenology of
relevance realization in terms of
meaning making the kind of meaning
making that ultimately we have gathered
together by the term spirituality so
let's let's gather what we've done okay
so we had problem solving right and we
went over this again in more detail last
time we have insight categorization all
of these things seem to be per
demonstrative reference that's the fin
sting and we we put that within right
the salience landscaping consciousness
and closely tied to it working memory
and then of course tied to that of
course is G right got inference that was
stuff with journey AK we've got
communication all of this
right it's feeding into relevance
realization we could give a naturalistic
structural functional organization of it
in terms of self-organizing criticality
and small world networks where these are
understood to mean families of processes
right and these are deeply related
together and as I've said we've already
got that this is inherently transgender
even sorry evolving involving that's
what I'm trying to get with caring and
participation and how right you know the
the know-how is grounded in the
situational awareness of respectable
knowing that's grounded in the
participatory transactive coupling to
the world right this is this evolving
evolving optimization process of your
connectedness you're fitted miss
to yourself to the world to other people
in communication for example alright
I've already given you an argument about
how via complexification alright this
gives us an account of our capacity for
self transcendence a capacity to produce
emergent functions and we saw that even
connected with insight and we can see
that at work directly out of this now
well why why self transcendence the
capacity for self transcendence to
overcoming self-deception is actually
endemic to your meaning making machinery
ok in connection with that of course
this would also explain these two are
related your tremendous capacity for
self-deception for bullshitting yourself
right because this has to do with
ultimately your procedure right your
salience landscaping etc as I mentioned
and that's part of here that the
connectedness that's so central to
people's sense of meaning in life being
connected to something that right is in
some sense greater than them other than
them in an important way but to whom
their identity is nevertheless coupled
I've tried to show you how it gives us a
nice account of respectable knowing and
participatory knowing
and then how these two can come together
in procedural noise talk a bit more
about that but the creating of
affordances we've talked multiple times
how affordances are the Ovation of a
transgender
within which my skills my capacity to
solve problems can be reliably trained
and developed okay talked about again
like I said that this has an aspect of
deep carrying in it so you're going to
find the sense of significance here this
is something you care about you bind
yourself soon you commit yourself to in
a very important way I already suggested
and I try to give to you that with the
account last time of insight how this
can help explain what's going on in
altered states of consciousness while
you're getting both a change in your
salience landscaping a change in your
relevance realization machinery how it
can be altering your optimal grip
optimal gripping is also a case of
optimization that fits within this help
to explain our higher states of
consciousness right now I want to start
pointing out some other aspects of it
that I think contribute to it being how
do I want to say this represented
understood grasped as spiritual in
nature let's take a look at some of the
features of relevance realization that
have come out of this argument so these
are all going to be ways in which we
experience this as our fundamental
framing of reality but and again but
that's good but it has a sense of us
standing outside we're inside the
framing we are participating in it okay
it has to do with right the framing is
right at the level of the agent arena
it's not just looking out its the
inclusive
relationship okay but I want to point
out to the fundamental fundamental LED
of this what I would argue this is a way
of interpreting what Heidegger means by
the prime or geology of what he was
talking about
I saw his Heidegger later have
criticisms of him but I'm also trying to
point out how this work which seems so
technical in some sense can be connected
to some very well deeply existential and
phenomenological philosophy ok so first
of all the fundamental fundamental 'ti
of this ok so notice that this is
ultimately pre-conceptual in nature it
has to be right because it's at the
level it's below your level of
propositional processing in order to
write in order to have concepts you have
to categorize in order to categorize you
have to have demonstrative reference
sorry in order to categorize you have to
have relevance realization also in order
to categorize you have to have first
have demonstrative reference which is
pure pre-conceptual relevance
realization so this is ultimately
pre-conceptual in a deep way ok and in
that important sense right it's
ultimately pre propositional pretty
propositional if what we mean by belief
and it's often what we mean by belief is
the assertion of propositions and their
implications then relevance realization
is taking place at a level fundamentally
deeper than the level of belief now you
understand that I'm not proposing that
this is just a bottom-up process of
course how we conceptualize things and
how we have beliefs about things feeds
back down that's why all those diagrams
have feedback down arrows in them but
we're talking about belief ultimately as
an effect it feeds back and effects but
it is ultimately of an effect
of relevance realization because of
course finding this fundamental framing
is pre inferential in a deep way because
inference it's pre communication that
means you could I learn this from other
people well no you can't there's a sense
of which you can refine it from other
people but you can't ultimately learn it
from other people because learning
presupposes it being able to pay
attention to your mother and pick up on
how she's communicating with you and
make inferences from that so that you
start to categorize the world and figure
out that this is a bottle presupposes
this and that points to something else
this is pre experiential not in the
sense that it's happening to you before
you have like in some previous life what
I mean is that you're meaningfully
structured experience the level of
common sense obvious nasira's alt of it
it does not generated by the level of
common sense obvious meaningful world it
is generated that world is generated out
of relevance realization being coupled
to the environment so it is pre
experiential it is pre egoic I think in
some important ways it's also posted
Gork but I'll come back to that right
because your agency and the world as an
arena in which you have a narrative Lee
structured reliably acting ego emerges
these Co emerge out of relevance
realization that's why they are
primordial II connected together in
participatory knowing so relevance
realization is pre egoic by the time you
have you in a common sensical e obviated
world of meaningful objects and
situations relevance realization has
already
done a tremendous tremendous amount of
work so it's pretty go ik its pre
normative and that's gonna whoa some
people are not gonna like that
I'm gonna qualify that it's prima
normative in the sense that it's your
primordial normativity before you can
assess truth things have to be
meaningful to you before you can you
know assess beauty they have to be a
specialized for you before you can
assess goodness right you have to have
agency and arena
this is this is this makes possible you
our normative judgments as to what is
true what is good and what is beautiful
I'm not saying it those judgments are
reducible that's ridiculous I'm not
saying that but I'm saying this is
primordial to them and that was part of
what I think Heidegger was going on
about so what I want to talk about now
is doing a little bit more of filling
out putting all of this together notice
notice how much this points to aspects
of human spirituality you have self
transcendence but you also have
foolishness you have the connectedness
you have the perspectival and
participatory knowing you have the
co-creation the co emergence the co
determination of the agent arena you
have the core right binding together of
your agency your caring and your
cognition thing about Plato right
it it it it helps to explain the
association of altered states of
consciousness and especially higher
states of consciousness with human
spirituality and notice a lot of the
features then you know that our spirit
is somehow it's deeper its deep like we
have all these deepness metaphors and
profundity metaphors right because look
what I'm showing you that it's it's
deeper than your ego it's deeper than
your judgments of truth goodness and
beauty it's deeper than your
propositional thinking it's deeper than
your conceptualization the way that can
be spoken of is not the way it is pre
inferential it is pre communication it
is pre experiencial it is a fundamental
grounding of your being and your being
connected because I'm arguing that those
are one and thus
saying a lot of what is captured by your
spirituality is captured by this the way
this machinery unfolds
phenomenologically perspective a leap in
a participatory fashion there's these
aspects of this that are therefore in a
fundamental sense unconscious but there
are these aspects of this in our
consciousness and there are these
aspects in this in what how are our
cognition and our consciousness can are
connected to the world
I want to use a term here and then I'm
going to develop it for the whole right
hand side I want to term for all of this
right so that I don't have to keep which
is sort of gesturing and flinging my
arms in a semi organized fashion at the
board I'm gonna use a term here I'm
gonna use the term religio and I'm using
it deliberately let me explain why first
of all as soon as you see that many of
you are hearing religion but I'm not
using the word religion I'm using the
word religion but I want the
associations with religion nevertheless
to be there religio is one of the
purported etymological origins of the
word religion Religare which means to
read back which is importantly similar
this means to bind together to bind
together to connect so it obviously is
pointing to this but it carries with it
many of these aspects the the primordial
'ti the fundamental framing of relevance
realization and all of this machinery so
when I invoke religio I am basically
invoking the right hand of this diagram
so religio is in that sense I'm using
the term I'm using it in a spiritual
sense okay so the thing here you know
Paul van der Clare would probably say
that you know this is a word that fudges
you know spiritual and I don't want to
be fudging I am trying to specify how
I'm using this word in detail and in
organization religion is a I'm using it
in a spiritual sense as the sense of a
pre ago ik ultimately supposed to going
binding that simultaneously grounds the
self and its world
now I want to pick up on that and pick
up on the evolving involvement carrying
participant like all of this and I want
to read you a couple quotes from an
article by Paul Acosta and a book called
the joys of secularism alright he has a
fantastic article there called a secular
wonder and he wants to try and explain
what's going on in wonder and think
about one you think about how it's
pointing towards the insight the sense
of opening up but also the connectedness
how perspectival and participatory how
it involves you caring how it often can
merge with awe and altered states and
potentially higher states so wonder is
central right but notice how he how he
the machinery he uses to explain
wandering this is a quote the very
ordinary fact that things always matter
right he puts it in quotes in some way
or other to us and that we cannot help
but be affected by things as if we were
immersed in a sort of bubble of
meaningfulness notice it's the relevance
realization how things matter to us and
no he uses the word matter because it's
that importance that can that
constitutive kind of relevance
realization and we're immersed in it
we're immersed in it we're merged in
sort of a bubble of meaningfulness or
better in an atmosphere of significance
an atmosphere of significance and import
notice the word import it's already here
that we do not create from scratch we do
not create it but are absorbed by the
metaphor of the atmospheric exerts not
only the image of a global container but
also of a rhythm of breathing breathing
the compression and particularization
the generalization and the particular
the specialization the assimilation and
the accommodation the breathe
are the lifeblood of our spirit the
metaphor the atmosphere should success
not only the image of a global container
but also that of a rhythm of breathing
and of a light refraction it's doing
well it's realization it's refracting
the light structuring the
intelligibility to which a living being
must listen to this word must attune or
adjust herself all the participatory
night this is from somebody who's
commenting on secularism
he goes on to point out there's a
central consequence of what he calls a
bubble of significance this is another
quote the experience of having a world
here the Heidegger in here has its roots
not in a head-on and focused
relationship with a clear-cut object it
is it is not something that we have is a
focal object something that we can write
objectify with an i8 conceptualization
the experience of having the world has
its roots not in a head-on and focused
relationship with a clear-cut object but
in the emergence of a bubble of
significance that for a sentient being
plays the same role that is played by
the atmosphere with regard to the earth
you participate in the atmosphere you
contribute to it but you emerge from it
and you did not make it it creates that
is special conditions of life where
existentially crucial distinctions
between inside and outside are drawn
that primordial ground makes all the
distinctions between the inner and the
outer possible for us the transitivity
is deeper than our subjectivity and our
objectivity because the constitution of
subjectivity and objectivity require all
of this machinery
he then goes on to argue that because we
aren't aware of the atmosphere in a
focal objectified way I mean as a as a
perceptually focalized object I don't
mean as an object of thought right he
then goes on to argue that the
atmospheric nature of the bubble of
significance means that we don't
experience it as a focal object but
through non-focal states such as and
here's the point of his article wonder
and awe or I would add their opposites
which we'll talk about later absurdity
and horror right so wonder is that state
in which we become aware in a
participatory and prospective way not in
a focal way but in a perspective of am
participating are of the significance
and our involvement and our indebtedness
new to and our participation from and
our committed 'no stew right the
atmosphere of relevance realization one
is tempted here and I I'm I'm worried
here about being sacrilegious so I I'm
using this analogously please but the
analogy is meant to be a strong one also
right this atmosphere you see what
Kostas doing here he's invoking you know
that you know what what st. Paul said
you know God is in whom we live and move
and have our being I'm not claiming that
relevance realization is God that's
ridiculous I'm not doing that but what
I'm saying is I wonder and awe which are
often directed towards things like God
are ways that cost is arguing in which
we disclose the relevance realization
and it's spiritual and significance to
its spiritual significance to us right
the way in which we with it with it with
within it we live and move and have our
being again this is from a person who is
trying to articulate a secular sense of
spirituality now somebody who is aligned
with this but I don't think is I'm
secular is the the masterful work by
Robert fuller on wonder his book on
wonder it's just a fantastic book and he
also argues how central wonder is now
what's interesting he does two things
that align with this so well and I
highly recommend this book he argued
because it's a book from you know
emotion to spirituality and what he
argues what fuller argues is that of
course wonder is responsible for some of
our deepest spiritual experiences our
deepest experiences of what I'm calling
religio but he does that by precisely
explaining the fundamental functionality
of things like wonder see wonder wonder
is basically in the being mode where
curiosity is in the having mode in
curiosity right now I'm using these
terms in their prototypical senses we
use these terms in very slippery
fashions so I'm not claiming that every
time we use the word wonder every time
we use the word curiosity but I'm
talking about the kind of wonder that
can overlap very readily and
prototypically with awe and I'm talking
about the kind of curiosity that
overlaps prototypically with our solving
our problems and our manipulating the
world in a way that we find powerful and
efficacious see an inch again remember
what I said and it's not that one mode
is good in the other modes bad but
you've got curiosity within the having
mode and that's great right because
curiosity is problem-solving its it
focused it has a focal object curiosity
is directed what is that what does that
do how does that work wonder is its
non-focal it's the opening up it's the
it's the sense of right the atmosphere
it's the perspective and participatory
sense of Oh
Oh ah right
and what fuller argues is and it makes
use of work like people like
Frederickson and others it's these this
emotion like this the the point of
wonder is right if if curiosity it gets
you to focus in like on specific
features of the world specific objects
wonder tries to get you to participate
in the gestalt the whole how does it all
fit together all pushes you towards on
opening an ongoing accommodation a sense
of the inexhaustible nest the
combinatorially explosive nature of
reality and the ongoing evolving
adaptability of your relevance
realization to that explosive potential
within reality itself
that's what wonder does wonder isn't
about solving a problem wonder is about
remembering sati your being by putting
you deeply in touch notice the language
in touch with religio
okay now
that brings me to another aspect that
overlaps with the primordial 'ti or what
I'm calling the fundamentality the
fundamental framing think about how
wonder gives you something like the off
again it gives you the sense of
participating emerging want from
co-creating with the ongoing course of
your world not as a story though but
something you can talk about with the
soy like we talked about evolution as a
story but it isn't a self
it isn't itself a story it's grounded in
something deeper
so
wonder aah it's not about solving
problems
remember the having mode is about
solving problems the being mode is about
confronting a mystery okay I'm gonna
take it that this has been now etched
into your brain and I am going to just
say I'm gonna rely on the word religio
to invoke all of the right side and the
fact that is dependent on the argument
that came from the left side as well
okay so think about wonder think about
ah and what we've been talking about and
this remembering of the being mode which
is so central to spirituality right so
that's another aspect of this okay so
think about this as accommodation got
opening up having to go right this is
you when I accommodate I come to know
something by how I am transformed in
order to come into contact with it and
in my own myself knowing of how I've
changed and my and the disclosure my
realization of that what that is are
bound together like prototypically when
you're in love with somebody to off okay
so this is accomodation and it's in the
being mode you're remembering sati
and in the mean mode you're confronting
a mystery
do you remember talked about Marcel's
idea about how a mystery right and
notice the machine we got
here's how I framed my problem and then
I realize there's a kind of insight that
my so initially there's an insight that
oh that framing is itself problematic
and I move to a more encompassing frame
and oh no and then what starts to happen
is ah I'm opening up ah right I'm
opening up and my insight goes from a
reframing from a to a trance framing
because I stopped having insights about
my focal problem I start getting an
insight not about just the the problem
or the world
I also remember remember the sensibility
transcendence I'm also getting an
insight into of the inadequacies of my
my style of framing my way of framing
I'm getting a trans framing happening
you get this trajectory of trans framing
it doesn't stabilize and that's the
point
it can't land on a focal object all
that's disclosing all that's disclosing
in the trajectory of trans framing is
the machinery of religio and yet you
find that like flow you find that deeply
meaningful to a point if it's pushed too
far
it becomes deeply meaningful in a
negative sense of horror
now think about this think about how
right and here's we have to be really
careful here
I want to talk about the that the
mystery of religio but I need to make a
distinction here that's a distinction
I've discussed before but let's go over
it very carefully there's a distinction
between something being a
phenomenological mystery and it being
something that I cannot theoretically
explain to equate them is to equivocate
between propositional and prospective
all knowing for example and we should
not equivocate between them because
they're not identical so for example it
is phenomenologically impossible for me
to respect i valino what it is like to
be dead because whenever i try to
conjure up a frame oh i'm in a dark room
but wait i'm still there in the dark
room there's the hereness and there now
- oh well then I'm nowhere well then I'm
just an empty no matter what I do I
can't get a framing that has within it
my own non-existence prospectively but
that is not proof that I'm immortal
it is not proof that I've existed for
all time course not that's ridiculous
that's a mistake
that's an equivocation so when I'm
talking about mystery I'm not talking
automatically you need an additional
argument you need an additional argument
to go from phenom illogical mystery to
the claim of theoretical in explica
bility they do not follow because they
are not identical for the deep reason
they're propositional and prospective
all-knowing are not identical
that is an equivocation so I'm talking
about a phenomenological mystery here
well what is it what what's at the core
of religio well the death example
actually points to something more
primordial right it points to the fact
that I can never make a focal object of
my framing
my capacity for relevance realization I
mean prospectively what I mean by that
is I whenever I am thinking right or
doing anything I'm oh it's always framed
because if I'm unframed
I'm facing combinatorial explosion which
is non intelligible to me so whatever
I'm thinking of it's inside the frame
but what is precisely not inside the
frame is the framing process so here's
the frame or here's the frame even
better right and here's the framing and
what's not in there is the framing oh
you say Oh what I'll do is I'll do this
haha that was easy John haha John I got
you that was easy
no you didn't get me because what's
outside here still is what is framing
that you cannot have this in a part
right well you can't have it as a focal
object it is mysterious
it is phenomenological mysterious James
pointed to this and in a wonderful
distinction and we between the eye and
the me these are the aspects of you that
you can bring into view well Who am I
well I'm John Verve a key and this is
what I look like here's an image in my
mind and what's not there is whatever it
is that's generating that name in that
image and then I go deeper and say ah
but here's the part of my right that was
generating the part that was in and I
can never stand the pun again right
I can never see the eye I'm always
seeing by means of the eye it is
phenomenologically mysterious - but it
doesn't mean that I'm unaware of it I
always have to use older language from
the course I mean I always have a
subsidiary awareness I'm always aware
through my eye of my me I'm always aware
through my framing of my framed its I'm
not completely out of touch with it it
is not inaccessible to me but I cannot
vocalize it I cannot make it a focal
object
I cannot frame it right the machinery of
relevance realization is
that sense deeply phenomenologically
mysterious to me doesn't mean I can't
talk about it theoretically I've just
been doing it but it has a deep
phenomenological mystery to me the fact
that it grounds and makes possible my
subjectivity and the objectivity where
that where what I mean by that is things
constellated into objects that we can
make inferences about etc right I can't
use the grammar of subjects and objects
subjects and predicates conceptual
categories to talk about this in the
sense of exemplifying it I can use words
to talk about it in the sense of
pointing to it but I can't produce it in
subjective and objective categories
precisely because the whole argument
points towards its transductive nature
again that only that only that only
makes it phenomenologically mysteries it
doesn't make it a theoretical
inexplicable 'ti I can look you you
cannot confuse properties of your theory
with properties of what your theory is
about if I have a theory of light itself
right isn't light if I have a theory of
war my theory isn't itself an instance
of war if I have a theory of gravity my
theory isn't it self generating gravity
my theory of vagueness doesn't itself
have to be vague in fact my theory of
vagueness should be clear okay
my theory doesn't have to exemplify what
it's talking about and there are cases
where it cannot exemplify what it is
talking about but that doesn't mean I
can't talk about what I'm talking about
it has to be that I have to understand
the limitations that are given by that
differences between the kinds of knowing
and also the ways in which I can and
cannot bridge between these kinds of
knowing so there is something deeply
phenomenologically mysterious and in
that mystery the mystery opens up an
affordance of a trajectory of trans
framing that allows us to participate in
prospectively that kind of Wonder and
awe of religio we can get into something
very much like a transgender Ector e
flow state in which we are basically
celebrating in flow our participation in
religion and we do this I would argue
for the very good reason that to make
significant to reflect upon to celebrate
and enact religio is to fundamentally
enhance our agency the disclosure of the
world and our connectedness to it and
what else could be more valuable to us
what else could be more valuable to us
so I think there is now a major
objection that could be leveled against
the argument that I am building and I
take this objection very seriously this
is the argument that yes John I will
grant you with Costa there's all kinds
of wonderful spiritual meaningful things
on this side and you're capturing a lot
about mystery and self transcendence and
also the capacity the negative capacity
of you know bullshitting ourselves and
reciprocal narrowing and falling into
right the despair and and and addiction
and you that you're capturing all of
that I'll grant you all of that perhaps
you're not but look just for the sake of
the argument I'm granting you all of
that but there's still something missing
that I think is central to what how I
use the word spirituality and what I
would smell what's missing from religio
that's found in religion is to confront
the sacred I'm trying to use a term as
neutral as possible here because it's
unclear I think if we should apply the
term divinity for example to the
Buddhist notion of Shunyata or the
Taoist notion of the Dao I don't think
calling it divine is a plausible
interpretation whereas God is divine I
don't think you should call the Dao
divine but the Dao is clearly sacred in
an important way and I think for many
versions of Buddhism that Shunyata has a
kind of important kind of sacredness so
the thing here is
there's two there's two things we have
to talk about and we have to talk about
them carefully but keep them distinct
but also show how they're connected so
the sacred is typically when we want
some account of the metaphysics of what
grounds our experience of sacredness so
this is some this is basically a
metaphysical proposal a standard Western
proposal although I've already given you
an indication that it's not Universal
it's not in things like Buddhism or
Taoism is that the sacredness is
grounded the metaphysical proposal is
grounded in being supernatural in some
sense and of course that's again a very
loaded term I'm gonna use it and the way
I've argued for in this video series
right something that you know is
historically constructed running through
people like Aquinas and beyond okay that
now that's so this is the metaphysical
proposal and then you ultimately have a
psycho existential proposal over here
which is proposal which is right well
this is what it's like to experience
sacredness this distinction comes to the
fore for example historically and
there's so many people right I wish I
could talk about more I need I need you
know I need three more series but if I
tried to run this for 150 episodes my
crew would kill me and then then there'd
be a tragedy they'd up in jail it just
it just be a mess so I'm going to stick
to the 50 right
but this proposed did pulling these
apart you find this of course
prototypically in the work of
schleiermacher where he sort of puts
aside this proposal because it's coming
into serious disrepute
because of the advent of the Scientific
Revolution and he shifts towards well
but what's the
psychological existential experience of
sacredness and you know his up his
proposal that it's the experience of you
know sort of absolute dependence and
coupled I would argue with things like
Wonder and awe but that's that
distinction right it came to the fore
and work by share market you can see a
lot of theological debate I would argue
I can't do the argument here but you
could see the lot of theological debate
as the debate between a side that wants
to emphasize sacredness and a side that
wants to emphasize the sacred so I want
to talk about this but I want to talk
about this in a way that reflects back
on that why do I start here I start here
because of course I've argued that
religio is exactly a psycho existential
very powerfully read this though no this
has to do with modal right with you like
the being mode it has to do with you
modal existence it has to do with trans
Jack tippity it has to do with
primordial tea you have to read this in
a deeply high daguerreian sense right
but that's what I mean it's a and psycho
meaning right having to do with your
cognitive processing all the kinds of
knowing right your embodiment your
embeddedness so reading psycho
psychological in also a very
comprehensive way but I'm clearly
arguing that religions on here so first
of all I should start here because
that's where I'm starting from and I
want to talk about sacredness as a
within a cycle existential sense and
then if I can if it's already done this
right around this and our our relevance
realization then I'm going to make
proposals about what this tells us about
the kinds of constraints that are
available to us in our metaphysical
proposal and I'm going to propose an
alternative to this which I imagine will
be controversial but I hope that the
controversial will be controversy will
be constructive rather than merely
adversarial all right so let's I'm gonna
start here I'm trying to be honest with
you I'm trying to be clear about what
I'm trying to do I'm not trying I don't
want to be shuffle
any cards from the bottom of the deck
here right and trying to be as upfront
as I possibly can be of course I'm not
I'm biased or any kind of magical claim
like that but I'm trying my best to put
the machinery that I'm aware of using
and then I'm deliberately putting into
play out front so that we can talk about
this as clearly and as honestly as
possible okay
so let's talk talk about sacred nips as
a psycho existential thing and where I
want to start right is in the machinery
of the agent arena relationship and I
want to bring back the work of Gerrits
and we talked about the work of Brian
Walsh and we talked about this when we
talked about DOM aside and Dom aside as
the loss of something and this points to
an invariant Rafi Chur of sacredness
that is so so central that we can it's
so back rounded that we can I think
inappropriately trivialize it but
remember what dama saw how disastrous
dama site is remember what happens if
you actually experienced homicide if I
if I fling you into another culture and
you experience deep culture shock or I
isolate you in solitary confinement okay
so that deep loneliness that deem
homesickness that deep cultural shock
that's dama side and so part of
sacredness gets argues right part of
sacredness is to home the world what
that's I mean I understand why he puts
it but it's not homing the world it's
homing us and the world together right
the world we are home into the world and
the world homes around us very much like
Kostas atmospheric bubble so this is the
idea that one of the functions of
sacredness is what Geerts calls a meta
meaning function now he talks about this
in his work on religion but he's
definitely in the clear marker side of
things so this is not appropriate
for me to do it this way and this is
something that fits in with our argument
very well geertz argues and be careful
here because people jump
he argues that religion isn't a system
of meaning oh no ok wait wait
he thinks it's a system of meta meaning
right so whatever whatever distinct
meaning systems we make here's a legal
system here's a moral system
here's a fashion system right here's an
entertainment system we have all these
meaning systems but notice the argument
that we've already made those are all
dependent on the primordial 'ti of the
trans jacketed relationship between the
agents of the arena if that relationship
doesn't hold none of those other systems
can work which is why we if you go to
another culture and you don't go through
the participatory transformation alright
if you don't and you're just experienced
in culture shock daaamn aside the agent
arena relationship isn't in place that
none of those other meaning systems can
work for you
they'll be absurd they won't make sense
that's what he means by it being a meta
meaning system what it does he argues he
argued that religion I would argue what
the experience of sacredness is because
again the word religion fudges between
are we talking about the slurm akheon
sense or are we talking about sort of
the metaphysical referent okay so
remember I've I'm pulling these apart to
try and avoid that confusion so but what
Garrett is talking about here is right
yeah if you don't have that that none of
your individual meaning systems work and
religion in the sense of the experience
the cultural and individual experience
of sacredness is what gives us the meta
meaning system that protects us from
domicile it protects us from the horrors
and the absurdities of domicile so one
of the one of the functions of
sacredness right is this the meta
meaning process of homing us against
horror
we're horror would be to be overwhelmed
by loneliness would be overwhelmed by
homesickness cultural shock and a
tremendous sense of alienation absurdity
and anxiety okay now that's important I
think that's a very important function
of sacredness we what we do when we go
into a sacred setting is we play with
Menem we we we have psycho technologies
and I'll come back and give a definition
of like a clear definition as we work
that out of a psycho technology but we
have psycho technologies that allow us
to do this serious play right with
sacredness so that we are constantly
being home de gainst horror and of
course many of you are aware of all the
research showing that people that belong
to religious communities or spiritual
pathways are much more resilient in the
face of the tragedies and horrors of
life that's a reliable finding one of
the ways in which I mean you you have to
seriously consider the other costs but
one of the ways in which you can improve
your capacity to make your way through
the world is to be committed to a
spiritual community and a spiritual path
and presumably it also has a history
behind it
it has institutions etc and that would
make it more prototypically like a
religion again you know me by now I'm
not advocating for a nostalgic return to
religion I'm trying to point out though
the functionality so worldview
attunement homing us against horror
remember cost even used the word attune
in there that's definitely a function of
the sacred now here's where I want to
criticize kids I think that while this
is definitely an important part up sorry
I slipped I should have said a function
of sacredness I made a mistake this is
definitely a function of sacredness but
I think that there is a mistake if we
think that sacredness can be reduced to
or identified solely with the machinery
of worldview attunement and hommina get
us against horror it's very plausible to
me that this is a necessary feature of
sacredness but I do not think it is a
sufficient feature so if we go back to
Hellenistic Damas idea if you remember
we talked about the different kinds of
responses there was syncretism and then
there's things like stoicism and the
remembering of the being mode but there
was also Gnosticism and Gnosticism keeps
reverberating right it keeps
reverberating through everything we're
doing here a nossa system of course is a
way of trying to awaken us to the
primordial tea and the mystery in some
important sense of religio that's
definitely what's going on but there's
something interesting about the Gnostics
and that's the element that the kana
emphasized that the trajectory of trance
framing is ultimately understood as
transgressive it's trying to write
overturn the grammar of a world view it
is transgressive in a deep deep sense
and I think that that points towards
something else that the sacred does for
us and right and this goes towards the
work of Auto deeply influenced by cohn I
hope you see how in a way my work is
deeply influenced by current
also by Hagel but OTO in his book which
is translated the idea of the holy very
bad translation many people argue a
better translation would be something
like the experience of the numinous
because Otto's argument is precisely
this notion has become very clouded for
us okay
it is it is plausibly related to notions
of wholeness and completeness there's
there's probably connections to words
like health which people wouldn't
automatically think of right but we know
that people typically think about this
connected now in terms of a moral term
or righteousness all right but the this
association says what's something else
is going on here right again the
etymologies are contested of course for
the word like that we know that this is
also weirdly associated with this and I
mentioned this before glory the glory of
God which is the predicate most often
applied to him in the Old Testament and
that's not a moral term so what we've
got to get to is what's going on here in
this experience of the holy and Otto
created this term the numinous picked up
of course by young right to describe
what what the original the word our
primordial experience of the numinous is
before all of these but what this is
most pointed towards a little bit of
this not so much this right what the
numinous is is the fundamental
experience and here's what I'm going to
talk about next time that the experience
of the numinous is ultimately to
experience the transgressive side of the
sacredness how it opens us up in Wonder
and awe and even takes us to the horizon
of horror thank you very much for your
time
[Music]
you
you