[Music]
Daniel thank you for making the time to
speak to me I know it's really late over
there and we're going to do a follow-up
to we did a situational assessment a
little while ago about Co vid where
we're at what the sort of second and
third order effects might be that we're
seeing and just to introduce you briefly
to people who maybe are not familiar
with you you've been on the channel
quite a bit with films like the war on
sense-making you're really interested
and spend a long time studying
catastrophic risk and sort of
civilization design and I'd love to hear
from you like where do you think we're
at right now so probably a lot of the
viewers here have heard the term the
hammer and dance
I think poyo kind of popularized I don't
know if he came up with it and that
there is an approach that most countries
have taken of some kind of strong
quarantine for a while to stop the
transmission and then a release of that
quarantine but that doesn't mean back to
life as normal instantly because they're
still going to be infected people and
then could re start if there wasn't
carefulness so there has to be some
ongoing management it'll involve some
social distancing and PPE and testing
and contact tracing and all these kinds
of things and some areas that have
already got the caseload down quite a
lot and started to open back up did
start to see up ticks in the number of
cases again so then you have to kind of
restrict again and that's the dance
right and so most of principles that I
share will be pretty universal to
anywhere because it's universal to
public health and epidemiology in like
that but I'll speak about them in
context of the United States in
particular since a lot of viewers are
there and I know more about there than
other places being based here so we
didn't have nationwide shelter in place
in a way that some people were concerned
about and some people really wanted but
for whatever we didn't have that we
Moorhead state based
approaches and but most of the states
took some kind of measures to shelter in
place and only have a central workers
out and things like that some states
like California did a lot stronger
measures earlier than other states and
resultantly we're able to have what
looked like much better curves relative
to the rest of the other metrics than
what they could have we're seeing what
looks like the beginning of a flattening
but it's not long enough to really have
a clear sense on that and you're
supposed to see a flattening as a
meaning a decrease in the number of new
cases as a result of those efforts but
that doesn't mean that it's we it's done
and you release the efforts and it's
gone right it means you release the
efforts of the your back to the
situation where it was on an exponential
curve before and because of the lag time
and call it two weeks right a couple of
five-day doubling times or so you really
have to see it turned down for a little
while before you actually have a clearer
sense of what has happened but let's
just kind of fast forward a little bit
and different countries are obviously at
different places in their curve with
regard to this and even within the u.s.
some states got heavy amounts of
infections much earlier than other
states and then some of them started
their shelter-in-place protocols earlier
and so it's not a universal curve and
for that reason it's actually really
good for individual cities and
individual states to be able to think
about it in a way that is relevant to
their case at the same time there's also
big limits there so let's say a state
did a very good job of getting their
case load down to almost nothing well
now they other states didn't they have
to keep their borders totally closed to
transport of goods into food into
whatever otherwise they lose it again
and so there is a place where whether
we're talking from a state by state or a
county by county or a country by country
level
to reopen up the flow of traffic which
is key for the economy and society
everybody kind of has to get to a
similar place so there-there are both
benefits of regionalism and limits to it
for a situation like this so with regard
to looking ahead a little bit and what
does the path of starting to release the
shelter in place or quarantine look like
it will be effective at being able to
keep suppressing the virus keep that
from being a public health pandemic
while being able to allow societal
function in economy in everything's
returned I'll share some thoughts on
that some of which are obvious and are
publicly talked about some of which are
not as obvious and hopefully in this
first bit sharing this all together will
add some clarity this is the day after
Easter and much of this might change by
a week from now because it is a
situation where a lot is still unknown
and we're learning a lot quickly and I
might be wrong about some things so take
it all with a grain of salt so the first
thing is when do we actually start
releasing the quarantine measures
different states have very different
perspectives on this and around the
country there's pretty different
perspectives all the way from the
beginning of you know say Sweden on one
side to Hongkong on another in terms of
how to approach this and you can really
see a difference in CFR and things like
that as a as a function of some of those
approaches as soon as the curve starts
to go down a little bit is not the time
that you start to release the shelter in
place which is the only thing that's
keeping it down you actually need to get
down to a relatively small number of
total cases within a region and the
region means the area in which there is
possibility for transmission so let's
say a city or a metropolitan area
you want to get down to a low total
number of cases in that area before you
start relaxing the shelter in place or
quarantine more otherwise you're going
to still get an uptick pretty quickly
we've seen this happen in a number of
areas you also shouldn't think about
releasing it universally meaning we
already have a situation of essential
workers who are done
quarantine aren't on shelter in place
because for everyone else to be able to
be at home the utilities still have to
be on and farmers still have to be doing
agricultural work and grocery stores and
frontline workers and all like that so
there will be an increase in the kinds
of essential services that can start to
turn on while still being able to
protect more vulnerable populations as a
first step so the most vulnerable
populations call it in nursing homes and
elderly care facilities and places where
there are people who are
immunocompromised and those places
should stay on stricter protocols for a
longer period of time and there are some
people who have been calling anyways for
let everybody who is younger and healthy
not be on quarantine at all and just
protect the vulnerable populations it's
not a good idea to do that I wouldn't
suggest it's a good idea fifty percent
of the people in Italy who are on
ventilators were under 60 and a lot of
people get very serious cases definitely
people die who are young and healthy
people but even the people who don't die
because a lot of the people who get
severe illness right now who are younger
don't die but that doesn't mean that
there isn't lasting damage for them so
there are signs of many of the people
who got to severe illness who are coming
out who have fibrosis in the lungs
cardiomyopathy damage renal damage to
you know kidneys and so we shouldn't
only be thinking about did they die or
not we should also be thinking about
obviously not just how bad two months
was that for them in the hospital bills
and the
overwhelming I see use and all like that
that's associated but also the lifelong
consequences that can be had from
getting into advanced age also it's much
harder to protect the vulnerable
populations when much higher numbers of
people have it because there is cross
contamination so the first strategic
objective and we talked about it last
time was make sure that the total number
of cases doesn't exceed the capacity of
the ICUs in the various cities we saw
what happened in Italy when the ICU
capacity was exceeded and there weren't
enough ventilators and there wasn't
enough treatment options for people and
case fatality rate jumps very very
sharply we still could have a situation
where we mismanaged this and that
happens but for the most part we've been
right at ICU capacity in some of the
worst hit areas like New York and New
Jersey but we haven't been in having to
decide if we have ventilators or ICU
beds as much so we do need to keep this
situation of making sure that the total
number of cases is within the capacity
of the icy use and also factoring the
fatigue of the frontline workers which
is a really significant thing that
probably everybody has watched plenty of
videos of nurses and doctors now who are
in some of the more intense fire zone
areas talking about their experience but
yeah New York has something like 80% of
the people who get put on ventilators
come off dead and we can talk about that
because it I think there are treatment
approaches that are much better than
ventilators that should be explored but
you can just imagine if you were nurse
working in a place and doing all the
work to ventilate someone in hope and
taking 80% of the people that you're
putting on and caring for off dead and
just what that's like there's only so
long that those people can do that also
as they have increased disease exposure
themselves so when we think about the
things that we can do
[Music]
that are relevant to mitigate the
disease let's think about the first part
being how do we decrease the total
number of infections the second part
being how do we decrease the percentage
of the infections that become severe in
the third part being how do we make sure
that there is enough treatment and ICU
capacity that wherever there are severe
infections are able to be well treated
this last step is how is getting
increased PPE to the hospital's
increased drugs and diagnostic tests and
things that have been rate limited to
some degree ventilators ICU beds
whatever and so there's a lot of kind of
logistics supply chain that has been
both super inspiring and the goodness of
people's work and super disheartening in
the poor Ness of the logistics
especially you know federally sponsored
supported logistics to get those things
but that's coming along most of the
focus is on the non-pharmaceutical
interventions that can happen to kind of
keep the transmission rate or the are
not rates down and so I'll speak about
that a little bit when the cases in an
area are low enough to start releasing
the shelter-in-place provisions one of
the most important things is that when
people are going back to work and daily
activity that they continue social
distancing for some period of time as a
general practice and specifically the
wearing of masks this is something that
the Czech Republic got really exemplary
and has had a very low CFR and a very
good overall curve that they attribute
very much to the mask policy just to
clarify because there are still some
people who have confusion about the
effectiveness of wearing masks and some
of the major health organizations put
out information that's conflicting to
what we know now early in the process
the main reason to wear masks is not to
prevent you from getting the illness but
to prevent you from spreading it and the
main thing that keeps you from getting
in as other people wearing the mask so
that was the thing the Czech Republic
did
this commercial in this whole kind of
memetic campaign of I protect you you
protect me which is really nice kind of
campaign and that's because even if I
have a crappy mask I've got just a
t-shirt right if I sneeze that's still
gonna block most of the droplets and
kind of larger particles from going and
getting becoming aerosolize getting in
the air getting on surfaces if I call if
it's gonna stop them from doing that and
so the main purpose of the mask wearing
is actually to keep the viral load in
the air and on the surfaces very low so
the space is safe for other people in
surfaces space say for other people in
the space now it is also true that
wearing PPE protects the wearer not
perfectly if you want perfect protection
you've got to get in an Ebola suit and
in a bola suit used properly is pretty
close to perfect protection and you can
think about like then you know a full
face shield and personally powered
respirator is not quite as good as in a
bowl of soup but it's pretty pretty good
and then even just a face shield and
gown and whatever is pretty good but we
don't have exact stats on this because
it's not really an ethical study to try
and expose people with different types
of masks to different levels of viral
load and see how much they get sick but
the estimate is something in the
vicinity of if someone's wearing an n95
they're about five times less likely to
get sick from the same exposure as
someone who's not wearing a mask that's
pretty significant right a fifth of the
likelihood is pretty significant and
even a surgical mass is not going to be
what an n95 is but it'll be a
significant reduction especially if you
know how to use it properly so going to
YouTube and looking at how to use PPE
videos is important because if a masks
effective what it means effective for
protecting you is that the outside of it
might have viral particles on it so if
you come inside and then touch it with
the outside the outside of it with your
hands and then don't wash your hands
obviously you kind of violated the
process so there's a whole process for
just understanding how to how to utilize
gloves and masks and things like that
how to sterilize the packages when they
come to your house or when you bring
food and groceries home all of that is
called can be called aseptic method
right or basically just kind of advanced
hygiene everybody's giving some lessons
in advanced hygiene right now somebody
on one of the projects were working on
just wrote up a good article on aseptic
method and I can send it to you so you
can link it in here so anybody who wants
to study it will have that as a resource
[Music]
and this is going to be a huge part of
it is the mask wearing and the actual
hygiene and aseptic practices which will
keep viral load down tremendously
relative and viral transmission down
tremendously we should also have
something of course that like wind
stores start opening up besides
requiring people to have masks to come
in that hand sanitizers out front of
every place out front of banks out front
of supermarkets etc and that's just a
part of culture for some period of time
because even if someone has a mask they
might have been under the mask
scratching and then they're going in
touching surfaces in the store so the
the consciousness around that part of
aseptic technique is don't do that but
also the sanitizer in addition to these
things one of the areas that I think is
going to be hugely important and as
least well talked about is the
industrial hygiene or the environmental
technologies and this is how can we
actually employ technologies and spaces
that take virus out of the air and kill
it on surfaces or binded on surfaces so
that even if there was the same amount
of transmission going into the space
there's less transmissibility happening
in the space as a result of the
technologies happening in the space so
this is not stuff that we don't know how
to do when you look at how a cleanroom
works where you're experimenting with
microbes you have to make sure that they
say say a bioweapons laboratory for
instance how to sterilize the space is
something that is pretty well known and
there's a lot of off-the-shelf kinds of
technologies
and there are some things that are
really cheap and easy some things that
are a little bit more advanced but
really cheap and easy is like when the
doctors wear a face shield the face
shield makes a difference right because
we're there's viral shedding in people's
exhale and so the face shield just has a
literal physical barrier beyond just a
mask
keeping it off their face off their eyes
makes a difference so right now in
grocery stores where people are still
going to grocery stores in the grocery
store workers have exposure to more
people than almost anyone has right now
there should just be a piece of
plexiglass between the grocery store
worker between the person at the
checkout and everybody who's coming
through just like there is a bank
sometimes that's a really cheap easy
solution that can be put in all those
places with a few screws and in addition
to the PPE on both sides you can
sterilize that a number of times a day
will decrease transmission pretty
significantly so there's a lot of kind
of pieces of environmental tech like
that most people probably saw the videos
of when Wuhan was on lockdown the
massive disinfectant spraying in the
streets drones were spraying and these
huge trucks were spraying and like they
were taking they were taking sanitizing
the environment very seriously right we
haven't seen a similar level of effort
like that happen anywhere else but we
also didn't see a curve come down as
intensely anywhere else no that was for
a number of reasons they they had a very
big explosion at being at the epicenter
of it but then they did very intensive
methods to address it one research
project that we brought together is a
group of people who have background in
chemical and physical engineering these
types of topics who are looking in all
the different air filtration methods so
HEPA filters and Peko filters and
ionization and those types of things
that can actually take the virus out of
the air either break it down or bind it
or both and then things like UV lights
there are specific frequencies of even
visible light that look effective in the
blue range and microwave and acoustics
that all kill the virus some of these
are safe to do when you
in the room some aren't they'd have to
be done sanitizing in between there's
obviously basic stuff like being able to
sanitize and reuse PPE then sanitizing
medical environments but also just lots
of other environments like all of the
fruits and vegetables that are being
handled by all the workers what can we
do not just when someone brings at home
to be able to clean them properly but
what can we put in the grocery stores to
be able to decrease the transmission in
grocery stores so for instance ozone gas
happens to be very virus idle dissipates
quite quickly so when the store closes
at night could have those own gas going
over the produce section or over other
areas there's other gases there's other
things that can be nebulized nebulized
hydrogen peroxide so we're looking into
these and types of environmental
solutions there's also in addition to
like surface disinfectants there are a
few companies claiming to have surface
treatments that can not just disinfect
but be able to actually bind viruses on
the surface for some period of time and
we haven't been able to verify those
claims yet we're in the process but
that'd be pretty awesome huge difference
so the first place we really want to see
these right away and working on getting
a proposal together in the next week for
it is obviously hospitals and I see use
because it's the place where are not as
the highest right now it's a place where
there's the most total transmission
because it's where you have the most
sick people with the most severe
sickness most severe sickness means
coughing the most and the highest level
of viral load I can't give any
quantitative numbers because I don't
believe they exist yet but it does seem
most likely that the total level of
viral load of exposure makes a
difference to how likely someone is to
get sick at all and the severity of the
sickness and so it's not simply are you
exposed to virus but are you exposed to
a million viral particles or a few viral
particles going to be very different
terms the immune systems capacity to be
able to respond to it and so these types
of technologies could take down the
viral load in the environments enough
especially in the environments where
people can't stop interacting
that any that a lot of people just
aren't exposed at all and any exposures
are very low viral load exposures which
means and which might actually even in
that meaning that people produce an
antibody response without getting severe
illness premature to know for sure but
things that being explored so in
addition to inside of hospitals and I
see use for the environmental tech and
in grocery stores prisons and police
stations and fire departments and all of
the places where there's humans in close
interaction with each other where they
can't do social distancing and as a
result if anyone gets it and is
asymptomatic can transmit to lots of
people in addition to hand sanitizing
and wearing masks and those types of
things we want to really look at
employing the environmental tech and
this will also be relevant with if there
are follow-up mutations and its
infrastructure that should stay in place
for future epidemics and pandemics to be
able to just make safer environments
independent of an in addition to the
social engineering the social
engineering just meaning human behavior
right having humans stay at home or
social distance or modify their behavior
with hand sanitizer
have to be careful because some of the
comments I've seen on these rebel wisdom
videos get pretty wild so I say a term
like social engineering and then pretty
soon I'm an Illuminati member but
so there's the environmental tech that
can make spaces safer and then there's
the social tech which is like @ic use
there should this is happening in some
places but it's not happening in every
place and the places that it isn't it
really needs to shift that there has to
be the ability to triage in the parking
lot if people are Kovac patients are not
coded patients and then a co-ed facility
and a not coded facility they're not
co-ed facility doesn't have doctors or
nurses or hospital staff that are Cove
it positive but asymptomatic allowed to
work there the doctors and which has
been the case throughout most of the
places in the US which means that
someone can go in and be more likely to
get kovat at the hospital than almost
anywhere else and let's say you've got
some other health issues going in for so
you already are you know in the
situation of comorbidity then that's the
situation where you most don't want to
get infections so we want to have things
like masks everyone should have a mass
before they leave their home but let's
say somebody messes up there's extra
masks out front at the hospital or
emergency room or ICU they have to put
on before they go inside keep the space
down if when people are signing in
they're touching something then all that
needs to be sterilized between times
that people are engaging with it
separating the kovat and the non kovat
people super critical so those are
basically kind of logistical things and
then there's the environmental tech in
those spaces and the combo of being able
to deploy things like the right kind of
UV light to sterilize equipment in
sterilized rooms the right kind of combo
filtration method so like something like
a Pecha filtration that can break the
viruses down with something like a HEPA
that combined them with the right kinds
of disinfectants and surface treatments
really could make the spaces radically
safer and now then when we start to open
back up widely and think about think
about like train stations and airports
and the places with very very high
contact are the things that we can do
you think about like a TSA person who's
sick touching everybody's passports and
whatever like the total amount of
infectious transmission that could
happen there is huge and if anyone else
was sick and giving them the thing they
they could get it right
a symptomatically so the little thing
that they scan under then it scans the
barcode could we add UV to it they also
sterilizes just basic kinds of
environmental tech that could make a
pretty significant difference
the other big thing obviously is
Diagnostics and contact tracing and this
is widely talked about the types of
Diagnostics matter and we see now the
whole thing about like a hundred plus
cases in South Korea that tested clear
that our testing tested having had
corona virus that they no longer had it
and have it again kovat nineteen
specifically and we're seeing that in
other countries there is this massive
question of whether or not immunity is
conferred and the nature of how it's
conferred and how long it will be
convert for and across what set of
mutations this is a super important
question I'll I'll get back to why in a
moment
but what is it it is it that they really
got better or was it the wrong kind of
test is a very important question
because it's not like all the tests are
the same the tests are testing very
different things
so the antibody tests there are some
people it appears maybe almost up to
thirty percent of the people who are
when using molecular methods using PCR
methods where we know that they have
this virus aren't producing meaningful
antibodies there's a big question of
like what's going on with that then
there are some people who have
antibodies where it's not clear that
they actually ever had kovat 19 so
there's a question of did they have one
of the four other corona viruses that
cause normal colds and that those
antibodies are actually protective
against this or in some cases so what is
an antibody test mean verse
what what are the actual PCR tests mean
and if we're doing PCR on what fluids so
there's a big thing around being able to
when someone has been sick when do they
get to come off quarantine well they
should come off quarantine when there's
no more viral shedding right when
they're exhale doesn't have viruses
anymore and their feces doesn't and
viruses and so rather than just a period
of time or lack of symptom ology it
should be testing based but that
requires the right types of tests more
importantly is early on in the process
we want to be able to test and if
someone has been exposed we want to be
able to know as close to when they got
exposed as possible not days later if
we're testing for antibodies it takes
many days for it to go from landing on
the mouth or landing in the nose to go
through the mucosal immune system into
the blood producing antibody response
and depending upon the sensitivity of
the PCR technique even if we're doing
nasal swabs if there's a small number of
viral particles will it be able to catch
it or does it have to wait for a lot of
viral replication because if we're
rolling out tests but someone has to
have been exposed to three days before
which means people are showing up clear
but they're not just because of the
earliness of false negatives that's not
very effective so the kinds of tests
that can be very high sensitivity can
pick up small total viral count ideally
be quantitative very fast turnaround
times super-important so we we've looked
at the different types of tests and
companies that are out there to be able
to help with a suite of things that can
meet the kind of national objectives and
beyond national there happens to be one
technology that's really asymmetrically
further ahead and the rest of them that
I'm trying to help quite a lot that I
think is going to be a major part of the
infrastructure for how to do pandemic
preparedness in the future where we were
able to identify and go into smart
quarantine immediately and never have to
go into totalize quarantine and all the
damage
that causes contact tracing maybe of all
the things I'd like the rebel wisdom
people to know about and pay attention
to would be contact tracing in order to
have the testing be effective you either
have to test everybody all the time
right like test very big percentage of
the total population and then if I test
you today and you're negative that
doesn't mean anything about do you go
and get exposed tomorrow so you either
need a pretty hype penetration on
testing or you need some smart process
to know who to test so that less total
test can still be affect them so the
goal of contact tracing is if you get
tested and it shows oh you are positive
that we can identify the people that you
came in contact with over the period of
time since you were probably exposed to
get tests to them since they have higher
likelihood and so we wanting to trace
the contacts you've had this is
something that I have been very
concerned by because this has been
enacted in a number of countries Asian
countries first and it is absolutely a
kind of surveillance apparatus that I
don't want States or companies to have
and I don't think anybody actually
thinks it's a good idea if you really
think about it we've been dealing with
the surveillance capitalism problems
that are already like so excessive that
it's all it's very hard to see how we'll
ever pull them back and surveillance
state types issues from FISA act on
right even before that so how do we and
this whole thing of when things are bad
enough that people will agree to civil
liberty damaging things because they
need to the terrorism is dangerous
enough so Patriot or Homeland Security
Act this obviously a very like
historical process to be able to
increase top-down control and power is
have a situation that justifies that
Google and Apple just a couple days ago
led the
in well lots of groups were working on
contact tracing in a way of being able
to roll it out since the two of them
together is most of all cell phones and
they're definitely looking at privacy
considerations which is really good but
getting the privacy considerations right
is going to be really key we do not want
the info of everywhere that you went and
everyone that you came in contact with
and all the surfaces that you came in
contact did anybody else came in contact
with as best can be identified we don't
want any company or the state to just
have that access we don't even want a
central database that can be hacked or
captured that has that access so being
able to do it in a decentralized
database form that is not hackable or
capturable or generally surveil abut
still provides what is needed is super
important so there are methods where the
info can be stored on the people's
phones directly Bluetooth mediated when
they come within a Bluetooth proximity
to each other and then it's only
unlocked if it finds out that you were
sick and then there were random numbers
that were generated between you and the
people who came in contact with and
it'll ping them hey you were came in
contact for someone who said go get
tested so making sure that the right
privacy provisions are in place so that
the solutions to this don't destroy
civil liberties we can see that in I
have a friend who works at a refugee
camp in Uganda and this has happened in
other areas but she was saying that the
quarantine was put in place for the
people to stay in the refugee camp but
there's no food in the refugee camp they
would have to walk to like a UN facility
that or somewhere like that that has
food and they're not allowed to walk
there and so the people are dying of or
at risk of dying of starvation
other than coronavirus and we can see
dritt are Thao
authorizing use of lethal force for
police for people violating quarantine
in the Philippines and so this descent
into increased authoritarianism at like
is it a good idea to have some process
where we ever do close down the borders
during a epidemic or pandemic yes
absolutely
and where we do some emergency
provisions like give doctors the ability
to treat that discretion more fully
regarding their malpractice and like
that based on emerging data before we
have randomized control trials yes but
do we want to give provisions to the
types of major power players the the
players that have major asymmetric power
that don't let asymmetric power go once
they have it no so I think that's and
this is a place where I think people
have been having a hard time is people
who are very libertarian oriented and
concerned with civil liberties and
things like that many of them not all
but many of them have been oriented
towards a narrative that the virus isn't
that bad and the whole thing is just a
conspiracy to take away civil liberties
and see these hospitals that don't have
any people in them there are hospitals
that don't have any people in them
because there are very bad logistics and
routing issues in many of the cities and
states where there are overwhelmed
hospitals with other hospitals that
don't have hardly anyone there and other
hospitals that have been opened up to
deal with this that weren't full yet and
then there are other people who say oh
well the virus is so bad we have to do
whatever it takes and have a kind of
naive
positivity towards authorities and don't
really consider the surveillance issues
I would say both of those are off naive
the virus has an issue so is asymmetric
power and both should be paid attention
to
so we have to get we do need to do
contact tracing and we do have to do
wide Diagnostics as part of the recovery
also with regard to ID Diagnostics it's
important that we do some random testing
not just people who are possibly sick
but random testing for the background
epidemiology that helps us know how to
solve this
but that doesn't like then there's a big
question around wait does random mean
that people have tests forced on them
who
the tests are we talking about doctors
are we talking about police so any model
where police could get to randomly stop
people and forcibly medically test them
fuck no that's a very bad idea but we're
medical doctors that are treating people
for other stuff anyways ADCO vid tests
to it yeah that's that's a totally valid
thing and so being very thoughtful of
the types of blowback negative effects
of the provisions that we put in place
and yet the need to put provisions in
place just making sure we're optimizing
for both solving this problem and not
causing other problems at the same time
there's a key consideration one other
thing I didn't say this should be
happening already today before we even
think about the dance phase is so I was
mentioning all of that was how do you
decrease the total amount of
transmission but this other part is how
do you make it to where people who are
infected a smaller percentage of them
have severe infections that's a huge
question right now there's stuff being
explored regarding plasma transfer so
people who have recovered who have
antibodies can we take their plasma
injected and other people either as a
treatment and or as a prevention it's
interesting research not far enough
along to know but like it's interesting
it appears that there might be some
people who from having had previous
corona viruses recently might already
have some background immunity and being
able to identify that would be valuable
but it's not known there is some
indication that there are more and less
virulent strains of this virus of SARS
co2 and that there might be less
virulent strains that people could be
exposed to that wouldn't produce illness
but would still produce a protective
antibody to the more virulent strains so
that's a very interesting kind of
natural vaccine approach and you know
herd immunity advancement type approach
but in addition to that there's also
treatments right not just can we have
antibodies but are there antiviral and
not just antiviral but h2 modulating and
cytokine modulating and other types of
treatments we there was so much talk
about hydroxychloroquine because when
Trump started talking about it obviously
got a lot of attention and it became a
highly politicized topic and then it
wasn't about just doing medicine well it
was about and you can see the biases
right you could see people who just
didn't want this to be that bad and
wanted there to be an answer and so
wanted to believe that there already was
an answer and you could also see people
who wanted Trump to be wrong and bad and
stupid for having said something like
that given that he wasn't a doctor a
public health professional who kind of
biased another direction and then they
of course all read the data with that
bias in mind so we tried to do a good
letter to review that looked at the
whole history of this very old drug
hydroxychloroquine by itself and in
combination this a through myosin
doxycycline zinc other things and what's
known about it on previous coronaviruses
on previous SARS in in-vitro trials in
mechanistic insights and in the kind of
open label stuff that we have so far
given that we don't have the quality of
randomized control trials that we'd
normally want to see and what I will say
about that is that it does not appear
that it's particularly effective in
late-stage but that's that's to be
guessed because very few antivirals are
effective in late-stage right it's
generally the principal and medicine and
with infectious disease and I'm not a
PhD in infectious disease research or
medical doctor so I'm just saying stuff
here verify it yourself but if you have
herpes outbreak and you take acyclovir
within the first 24 hours maybe up to 48
hours it can be quite effective and
beyond that it does almost nothing
and the same is true for shingles and
the same is true for when you start the
HIV cocktail can be very effective early
on is not going to be very effective
late so the idea of authorizing
treatment for late stage or doing a
randomized control trial late stage
doesn't really make much sense based on
the whole body of what's known about
antiviral treatments in general this is
actually something I'm very concerned
about is if a randomized control trial
is done on whether it's lopen Avira REM
des aveer or hydroxychloroquine or
whatever but let's say it's done on any
antiviral late stage and we find that
it's not successful compared to the
placebo group and then we over
generalize that to say it's not
successful and as opposed to it's not
successful late stage we don't know
anything about early stage if we didn't
test it and the most successful
antivirals we have that work towards
anything aren't successful late stage
that's just that's we shouldn't be doing
that study that's a very bit dumb study
now of course we would like to be able
to treat late stage because there are
some people who are there so I don't
mind the randomized control trial that
does both early stage and late stage in
case we get lucky on late stage but the
precedent should be anything being
studied should be looking at early stage
treatment I do want to say something
about the epistemic s' of randomized
control trials but I have a couple open
loops here the thing with regard to the
hydroxychloroquine so we want to see
randomized control trials early stage it
will take awhile for those to come out
some of them are already in process some
of them are nonsense and only looking at
late stage and aren't going to tell us
anything that we don't already have a
pretty good guess about but as it is do
we have enough insight that most every
doctor who I've spoken with about this
issue who studied it well has said this
is what I would use for myself and my
family even if I can't take that opinion
that position publicly because it's not
defensible traditionally yes yeah yes I
had some quite famous infectious disease
doc say this does I already have it for
myself for and if any of me or my
get sake this what I'll do but I can't
talk about it publicly or say anything
to that effect because the hospital
system that I work for said I'd lose my
job I can't prescribe it to patients
because the hospital system said that
because they have been very trained with
malpractice and other things to take
maximally defensible positions so what I
think is that in the hydroxychloroquine
it's interesting because it's generic so
nobody can make all that much money on
it because anybody can make it right
it's off patent now so since any company
can make it they're just competing on
the margins of being able to you know
produce the goods slightly cheaper real
money is made for things that are still
on patent so if someone if we were
wanting to look at kind of predatory
perverse incentive it would most likely
be to prove that the generic things
don't work to motivate the movement of
drugs that actually have more money to
be made and there's been some
interesting traction not just with
hydroxychloroquine but also ivermectin
and methylene blue which are all super
old very well known anti malarial drugs
that have some antiviral and other kinds
of activity I'm very interested in the
research on these drugs and other things
like them where we have 40 or 50 or 70
years of use on these because it means
that we have very long-term safety that
are already established we know what the
contraindications are we know what the
safety is and there really aren't any
financial motives that are associated so
all we have to do is show efficacy we
don't have to do long term safety so I'm
happy to rush randomized control trials
if need be in a situation like an
epidemic on something where long-term
safety is already established in other
contexts and all we're doing is
establishing efficacy in a new context I
would not be happy to rush a new drug
it's a totally novel chemical and we
don't know anything about its establish
safety and I certainly would not be
happy to rush a new vaccine which is
intended to have enduring effects so the
like the epistemic that are needed for
something new where we haven't
established safety randomized control
trials
are not the same epistemic saz taking
all the knowledge we have about
something that we have a lot of
knowledge and just adding knowledge to
it so that's a I just asked about
hydroxychloroquine because as you say
there's been a lot of controversy about
it's become kind of a little bit of a
political football but at the same time
there are I feel kind of the need to to
push back a little bit because there
have been sort of concerns about and
it's used for a lot of other treatments
at the moment and there's potential
shortages because of people getting very
excited about it's used for covert 19
and from what I've I mean I sent you a
couple of articles from The Washington
Post just before we started recording
and the kind of the what is kind of
generally accepted or the narrative
that's that's out there mostly is that
it's not the evidence is not good and
that the initial trial showing that
there was some usefulness in it have not
been positive or that there were major
flaws in those trials so I'm kind of I'm
concerned about putting something out
there that might kind of add to that and
that we haven't kind of we're not all
able to completely check so what's your
sense of what the narratives are and
what the truth is well fortunately it's
a prescription medicine so you can't
just get it on your own your doctor
you'd have to talk to a doctor and they
have the job to review this and make the
decision so I'm not going to advise
anyone any medical advice I'm not
offering medical advice I would say talk
to your doctor about it but if you want
to talk to your doctor and be well
informed do your own information
searching but if you know that this is a
highly politicized topic and that there
are articles that are radically
different on this particular thing then
to actually make sense of it is going to
take a little bit deeper work so I'll
tell you how I make sense of it and my
sense making is almost certain to
increase on this particular topic as the
days and weeks following more
information comes out
so is it a benign drug no there's
totally contraindications and risks and
nobody should be drinking fish tank
cleaner like and if you just happen to
find some hydroxychloroquine somehow or
chloroquine by the way those two are
quite different hydroxychloroquine has a
much lower side effect profile and so
any study that is comparing those two as
if they're the same thing that is also
inappropriate but are there concerns for
people with specific kinds of heart
issues that it along gates this QTc
interval yes so you would want to see
your doctor they would look at the
contraindications of what not to do
would not to give it with in terms of
other drugs you're on or existing
medical conditions maybe do an EKG and
then decide if you seemed like a safe
person to do it with where the benefits
of doing it outweigh the possible risks
of doing it and that kind of risk to
benefit assessment is the key to using
medicine with regard to shortage and
supply so if we look at the food supply
system right now we see that there are
areas where farmers are telling crop
back into the soil
potatoes are rotting because no because
McDonald's isn't feeding people so they
aren't buying french fry materials and
dairy is being dumped in huge amounts
and so it's like there's food wastage
happening because of food excesses
because the normal distribution channels
which are stores that aren't selling it
restaurants that aren't selling it but
at the same time there are people who
are starving in places in India where
they can't get food and you see these
lines in San Antonio of cars that are a
mile long waiting for food lines it's
not that there isn't enough food or that
there's too much food there's actually
an intelligence issue right a logistics
issue of getting the stuff from where it
is to where it needs to go the same has
been true with PPE where it's like there
have been huge
stockpiles of PPE and in other places
and it just hasn't for whatever set of
reasons got where it needs to go it's
the best of my understanding that's the
case for the hydroxychloroquine there
are both meaningful existing stockpiles
and a lot of places that are up ramping
their capability to produce it because
it's an extremely simple molecule and
being that it's generic any lab that
wants to start to make it it could start
to make it I mean they would need FDA
approval if they're in the US they
obviously would need something different
if they're in the developing world which
is one of the nice things is being able
to have something that is actually
producible for large population
developing world type places
so one of the things we did was so there
was this there was a Chinese study and
there were questions about the validity
of the Chinese study there were two
Chinese studies actually then there was
this French study that got a lot of news
and there were questions about the
appropriateness of the methodology on
the French study then there was this New
York doctor Solanco who did it and you
know he was claiming near pretty close
to perfect results and there were
questions about his methodology and then
there were more people that started
claiming that they were having success
using it so we just brought a few MDS
together who understood the pharmacology
of the drug did a review of all the
literature and then called all the
doctors we could find who had been using
it in this country and in other
countries and especially doing early
treatment and said just give us all your
data so what how many people did you
treat what were they presenting with
what kinds of diagnostics did you do up
front and then what have you seen in
terms of progression to severe cases and
like that this is not randomized this is
not placebo controlled double or single
blinded it is multi-location if you
factor the aggregate data now does it
mean anything those all be placebos well
we could look at the total effect that
placebos the range of effect that
placebos have for similar viral
conditions because placebos don't have
100
success right they have a specific range
of success where you can remove that
statistical artifact and see is there an
effect beyond the type of effective Lisi
Bo's typically have especially when you
see that there are mechanistic effects
and in-vitro effects and you know in
vivo on other types of viruses so a
pretty large number of doctors said that
the people that they had been treating
early on who were presenting with Cove
in nineteen that the percentage of those
people that progress to needing
hospitalized was about seventy percent
less on average across them than the
average background rate of what's
assumed to be the number of infections
that progressed to the needing
hospitalization now there's questions
regarding if the average background rate
is correct and if just simply seeing a
doctor and calming the person's mind was
a part of that there's all kinds of
questions but that's not meaningless
data it's not a randomized control trial
but it's not meaningless data so the
proposal that we suggest that I would
suggest here is that a a emergency
provision be put in place I would like
the FDA to do this I don't know if it's
possible that prescribing physicians are
allowed to treat at will with the best
of the data currently available to them
where specifically what the law would be
doing is having the hospital system they
work for and/or the malpractice
insurance actually protect them and so
that's not just with the use of
hydroxychloroquine it would also be as
information comes out on ivermectin or
methylene blue or the PDE inhibitors or
the cytokine storm modulators or the I
have heard a number of doctors say that
their hospital complex said that they
would be fired if they prescribed
hydroxychloroquine even though they
believe that they should in cases not
telling anyone they should go treat
themselves I'm saying that the doctor
should have the ability to be exposed to
all the literature that's currently
there and be empowered to follow their
Hippocratic
and save lives as best as possible in
lieu of real data in lieu of adequate
data because not adequate in lieu of
idealized data this is basically saying
epistemic sin wartime are different than
they are in peacetime and randomized
control trial is not the only epistemic
tool in the whole universe and there is
an ethics to inaction
so if inaction means I know this
percentage of these people are going to
go to advanced cases and die and these
are people who have comorbidities and
increased risk in whatever then there's
a very real need to say do we have
enough data to say that it is a right
choice that the risk benefit is worth
this and that would be a decision
between the doctor and the patient I do
believe that during this time rather
than only allow fda-approved things
doctors should be able to treat that
will and you know that there one could
say from an FDA perspective they're
allowed but not from a malpractice or a
hospital perspective often and that's
going to be the key thing that we would
want the state to legislate in the
support of I wonder you mentioned the
second and third order effects and you
talked about a lot of those in the last
film that we put out are you seeing any
of those well we already mentioned some
of them right like talking about the
food supply so the the huge number of
locusts that are in parts of northern
Africa and parts of the Middle East
they the locusts were already there
before the Kovan thing happened but they
got much much worse I don't know the
specific stats on how much worse in
recent infestations but it's definitely
the biggest thing in recent times and
destroyed crops in those areas that was
actually because of travel bans that
kept the pesticides from getting to the
farmers and so because they couldn't
give the pesticides they couldn't treat
for the past's and because they were you
know doing agriculture that's very
susceptible to pests then they were all
able to be devastated there were similar
kinds of things that happened in India
that led to crops rotting in fields and
so we have this over demand and under
demand supply chain set of issues where
we have both rotting food damaged food
supplies and people with no access to
food simultaneously and we're just at
the beginning of those effects starting
to happen but those effects
don't go away very quickly right like if
you lose a crop that's gonna have some
enduring effect and then you start
getting manipulation on the price of
food commodities so could there be
escalation to food riots or wars over
food shortages in areas where people
don't have food like those are very real
things and especially when you look at a
place like India where the total number
of people that could be in food shortage
is a huge number of people then does
that lead to violence does that cleave
along Muslim Hindu lines could that
escalate to India Pakistan issues so
this is where we're looking at an issue
where you've already got systemic
fragility and you've already got
basically a situation primed for
catalysis types events where you know
the the financial system pretty much
broke right the economy is
extraordinarily damaged the social
fabric has been very damaged in lots of
areas we weren't talking about this very
much but
in addition to the mental health crisis
that's happening from people being at
home and not able to take care of their
mind and the way they're used to in the
increased anxiety do we start seeing
benzo prescriptions go way up that'll
also have a long tail of the damaging
effects of the benzo prescriptions are
we seeing increased domestic violence
both spousal ii and towards children as
people are in proximity with each other
that they aren't used to having it and
then what are the long path societal
effects of that trauma that occurs right
obviously it doesn't take very long to
destroy a small business takes a pretty
long time to rebuild an effective small
business and it's like cutting down an
old-growth forest do you just don't get
one back very quickly and so the damage
to just basically the unemployment and
we've seen what the unemployment just
complete skyrocket 10x plus any previous
you know similar time period people
don't get to refine jobs as quickly as
they lost them or rebuild businesses or
so there are enduring effects there
obviously if surveillance apparatus is
put in of the wrong type they're very
enduring effects so I think that and
then you also have things like the you
know the nature of alliances and
geopolitical tensions has already
changed the world and it's just not all
realized yet but the EU is already in a
very vulnerable position for lots of
reasons and this was just on the tails
of brexit and then having some countries
get hit so hard and not receive EU
support from other countries that got
hit much less hard because they use
their own resources but they didn't feel
like they had enough resource to help
the other ones what does that do to the
EU and then specifically how do other
state actors that have very strong
agenda with regard to what happens how
does Russia play that situation to get
Baltic alliances back and how does China
play it to be able to advance Belden
Road initiatives rebel wisdom was set up
to make sense of the world at a deeper
level than the mainstream media it was
built for these times of crisis and
change which is why we want to do what
we can to meet the challenge of the
times more films and also for our rebel
wisdom members weekly sense making calls
with our amazing interviewees and also
we're introducing the wisdom gym a place
to practice some of the skills that
we've talked about on the channel thanks
for watching and see you soon
[Music]