everybody sorry for the low five both in
terms of the camera in terms of my face
but we are we are there's been a whole
lot of stuff going on and I've been
coming across a whole bunch of different
ideas both in my own head and
interactions with other people and it
seems like it's useful to share these
more broadly so I think of this as deep
code bits and this particular topic I
want to focus on the notion of universal
basic income and how it relates to the
problem of effective collective
intelligence I think there's a couple of
I think bad frames and bad ideas about
how ubi is being considered and to be
perfectly frank I think these are also
part of some bad ideas about the nature
of how the market works so when we take
a look at the market at least a sizeable
fraction of what we are looking at and
caring about is distributed intelligence
so it's a form of collective
intelligence the whole premise of the
market - why it's the reason why it's
considered to be more powerful and more
valuable than a bureaucratic top down
since making a choice making mechanism
is that it has the advantage of being
able to access the perspective and value
it's of capacity and values of everyone
everybody at the edge and then through
the very specific communications
protocol of money and the price signal
can propagate that signal in an
environment that actually the invisible
hand turns into intelligence other
people can use it right so the the price
of a gallon of gas tells me a lot about
what's going on in a huge distributed
marketplace and I don't have to know any
of the rest of that information I don't
have to know anything about the
underlying drilling technologies and
transportation technologies and
geopolitical forces and although this
stuff I can actually look at the price
of gas and that gives me an the
information which is at least relevant
to some of my choices certainly not all
of them and specifically can give me
information that may be relevant to my
entrepreneurial choices right so if I
see the price of gas is quite high I
might decide to focus my efforts on
electric cars okay so in that context
we're thinking about the market as a
form of distributed intelligence I'd
like to introduce you bi as a mechanism
to increase the intelligence of the
market in fact that's the point
think that there's a frame of UVI as a
form of welfare that I think is wrong I
think there's that happens it happens is
this kind of a side benefit a really
nice side benefit but more importantly
what ubi is is a mechanism of
dramatically increasing the value of the
Commons of the market as a collective
intelligence and I do that it does that
in two ways at least two important ways
and by the way I'll throw in a third
piece of the story as a as a bonus at
the end so one piece of it has to do
with the the network topology and the
supply of signal right so for example my
own sense or iam my my six senses
provide input to my my intelligence my
time using my senses to make sense of
the world around me now if I close my
eyes the fact that I have eyes isn't
very helpful because I've cut off the
amount of signal that I'm getting from
the visual field and a lot less
intelligent than other words would be
okay well in our current distribution of
money we have a very bad ratio of signal
we have some nodes say like Bill Gates
who have an enormous amount of signal
meaning enormous amount of money that he
is putting into the supply and demand
key equation of the entire market a
massive massive amount of signal now I
will accept the premise that he's a very
smart guy I accept the premise that
you've learned big skills and has good
things to share but the magnitude of
asymmetry of that signal to all the rest
of the nodes in the environment is
clearly disproportionate and therefore
it concentrates too much of our
collective attention on the things that
his particular intelligence is orienting
attention towards where his money is
flowing all right flip it around
contrariwise we have on the global basis
a billion people who have scarcely any
signal and in the United States we still
have a sizable fraction of the
population who have far too little
signal and so their capacity to perceive
what's going on know what things matter
and orient our collective attention in
those directions is far too little all
right so at a topological level if
you're just trying to create a
distributed intelligence graph and
you're using money as a mechanism of
trying to get communications from all
the different nodes
what is what deserves attention and what
deserves to flow resource and energy at
it which is again what this market is
doing you would want to have a least a
minimum amount of signal coming from all
nodes so instead of UB I why don't we
call UB signal right universal basic
signal that every node which say every
member of the network has must have for
the networked actor should be getting
the information it needs to be doing
effective sense making right that's
that's one piece that's key elements so
when you start thinking about it in that
way and you're like well well how
powerful would the marketplace be what
would be the value of the Commons of the
market if we were actually able to get
it to have meaningfully substantially
better intelligence because we actually
just had the right amount of signal well
and with the metaphor how much powerful
would I be if I open my eyes it's a lot
it's a big difference
and so that's one big argument in why
ubi is is in fact not just a important
but I would say as we go forward and as
the complexity of the environment we're
dealing with is continuing to grow
getting our markets to be vastly more
effective at collective intelligence
means ubi is almost certainly requisite
okay the other side in this other side
is where welfare and market
effectiveness also did bound up this has
to do with the fact that every person
every node in the network is going to
have a differential relationship around
their risk the risk profile that's so
they may be risk neutral they may be
risk seeking in the Navy risk-averse now
this becomes particularly pointed where
risk aversion risk seeking behavior
highly asymmetric which is to say when
people have a lot of money people have
very little money because of course in
our environment there's a smooth curve
and then a steep drop-off in terms of
how many resources you have - you've got
$20,000 a year predictably reliably and
smoothly and from an end up you have we
might call optionality you are
relatively risk neutral you at least
provisionally ish say no to an option so
if somebody comes to you makes you a
market transaction says hey would you do
X for y dollars your ability to say no
is not catastrophic for you right you
don't get stuck having to sort of starve
to death if you say no to that
but as soon as you start getting below
that number and it may in fact be a
higher nipple so just use X but below
that number you actually become risk
averse which means that your ability to
say no to it to a transaction isn't
giving the right signal back into the
market right had you wereyou
risk-neutral you would have said no but
you're not missing neutrals so now
you're saying yes well that's telling us
more than anything else it's just the
market actually is characterized by
nonlinear relationships around risk
subversion and risk seeking behavior and
that actually doesn't tell us a whole
lot more it just means that our network
topologies up that's all it tells
us because well let me give you the
example so I've got a particular
archetype of an individual that I read
about after the 2008 financial crisis so
she was a old woman who cleaned the
toilets in the JP Morgan office and she
actually ran three shifts so she went to
three different places throughout the
day so this is a very hardworking person
and of course she's paid minimum wage
because that's what you pay do the
people who clean the toilets in your
office so you had bankers who were
definitely destroying the economy and
being very greedy and bad making lots
and lots of money and this lady who was
definitely not destroying anybody and
was doing something of vital service
who's paying great little and working
really really hard so that's what I
would say that's a problem in the nature
of the market because here's the thing
imagine if she had the ability to have
auction ality imagine if she had a
source of income that was not dependent
on that particular job and when offered
to be paid $8 or $10 an hour to clean
toilets you could just say off and
go do whatever they else should water
including nothing all right it's crucial
the ability to say need to do nothing
changes the profile what happens across
transactions you now have an actual
agreement an actual win-win agreement
only works if both parties can actually
walk away from that transaction if both
parties can walk away then with the
price that they agree to as the real
market price if one party can't walk
away the price to agree to is not the
real market price anymore you're not
getting good signal in your price
equation so let's imagine she could say
 off she had a ubi for example and
that ubi was big enough that she could
literally just say no thank you I'll
just go home and do nothing but raise my
kids and grow a garden wherever else I
think it's cool well very soon
thereafter the boys at JPMorgan have to
figure out how they gonna clean their
own toilets of course they could clean
their own toilets that's perfectly valid
solution aye-aye sir
that's how I clean my toilet toilet at
home or they could choose to hire
somebody but now they're gonna have to
actually hire somebody at what we call
an actual market transaction wage no ok
so what's it gonna cost what's it really
what's the right actual price for that
particular service well if both parties
on the transaction have the ability to
say no and to walk away then the market
price is whatever they're actually able
to agree to both people now with the
free choice to enter into the
relationship agree i man assume it's
gonna be a lot more than 8 bucks an hour
maybe it's $80,000 a year ask yourself
how much would you have to be paid to
clean somebody else's toilets
particularly fuckwads at JPMorgan let's
go to the hundred thousand dollars unit
just to make the number right now here's
the thing JPMorgan can afford to pay a
hundred thousand dollars a year to get
the toilets cleaned I mean their annual
bonus check might go down by a little
about they'll still be very well-heeled
and the toilets would still be a clean
but now the market is actually correctly
seeing what is really valuable in the
marketplace at a much higher level the
real value of our actual services when
we actually want our actual demands is
more effectively revealed and so our
collective intelligence is more able to
orient resources which is to say for
example if the sort of total amount of
GDP that was going to toilet cleaning
went from 0.1 percent to 3 percent
because the price actually went up or in
this case 1% then maybe a lot of must
would turn his attention from building
electric cars to building toilet
cleaning robots my just entrepreneurs
and start getting right signals from the
marketplace of what places to point
their attention because those are the
places that they can make the most money
all right so this is the thing ubi is a
mechanism for actually making our market
work effectively as a collective
intelligence device it creates a
mechanism we're getting enough signal
from all the nodes who actually benefit
from the distributed intelligence that's
available in the entire market and it
creates the ability of the price
equation is actually getting real
information because the transactions
they're being made are actually
reflecting the real values in the
environment and those are two key
elements once you've got those two key
elements in place you get a vastly more
powerful market as a comment so then the
last piece the bonus the
this notion of a human sensor network
right the idea of the marketplace as
being a way of human using human beings
everywhere as super super high quality
sensors of what's going on in the in the
world and what kinds of choices would
actually have the most value if we say
that's the thing we're trying to
accomplish or this one big piece of the
thing we're trying to accomplish then
the market is one piece of that it's not
the whole piece there's lots of
different ways that human beings can be
empowered to provide a signal back into
and then back out you can actually have
a highly decentralized mechanism where
like the market like my economic choices
come from me they go to everyone
suddenly and come from everyone back to
me suddenly in a way that I can make
sense of them so if we sit there as a
higher-order objective and say alright
our choice our challenge is to figure
out how do we actually design a
distributed collective intelligence that
has the characteristic that everyone's
full perception across all the
modalities of perception are
communicated in communications channels
that propagates smoothly and easily to
everyone else in a way that is maxima
supporting their own choice making and
then back that's the design we're trying
to get in place and ubi is a significant
piece of that in my estimation