welcome to meditating the Chandra Vicky
we do this every weekday morning at 9:30
a.m. Eastern ton with Mondays
alternating between the Dharma day in
which I teach a new lesson and paya day
it's about you pa RA that in which I
reviewed the entire ecology of practices
if you're joining us for the first time
you're most welcome what I recommend you
do is go to the there's the links in the
description the notes for this video and
you will find links to previous lessons
in previous its due lesson one right
away and then keep joining with us and
then every prep Saturday or Sunday or
whichever day is most free for you do
another lesson and so forth and that way
you'll eventually catch up and be
integrated with the rest of us at the
end of every sit there is a QA please
limit on your hue your questions to this
ecology practice this course we're all
on together for more encompassing
questions you can come to the general
Q&A you have every third Friday of the
month 3 p.m. Eastern Time and that will
be July 17th will be the next one it's
on YouTube streams live on YouTube
please like the stream to increase the
visibility in the YouTube algorithm and
that will help me to help as many people
as possible so Monday was a dharma day
we reviewed it on Wednesday I'm going to
review that again so let's review the
overall idea but the framing of this is
I'm giving you write all constellation
of practices and it's not that you're
going to master them all is you're going
to from them you're going to curate and
collate and cultivate an ecology
practices and that's what's going to
keep happening for you and so let's
remember some of the design features
just like we have complementarity
between meditation and contemplation and
continent and complementarity between a
Siddha practice and move
in practices might see one principle of
design principle is complementarity you
also related practices on top of each
other the way they you know Praja is
layering of meta and the pasta together
we also have practices that link other
practices together like the Synod Qigong
practices integrate between the moving
chicag practices and the seated
meditative practices our mindfulness
practices I should say so those are the
principles to keep thinking about and
keep trying to and I'm trying to
exemplify them and then what we learned
this passed on today was a particular
linking practice which is seated chika
and so I'm going to take you through
this again I'll describe it again and
then what we'll do is we after I
describe it again we'll set our phones
get in the posture we'll set the time
for 15 minutes in total I'll grow
through the external one like and right
and then we'll go into sauna mode you
can do the internal one movement of mind
and then go into whichever seated
practice you wish so let's say you've
done some of the moving some of the
standing the jon-jon some of the moving
each one you're doing that the Qigong
practices alright and then we sit and
what we do is we're going to and this
again notice that this is also layering
on the breathing the moving cheek on
we're going to do is we're going to
inhale and do lift look up and pantomime
on as you say all while breathing in and
then as you exhale that they are become
a de prayer position and then as you
inhale you're pressing in with your
hands and moving towards the very center
of your mind you exhale you relax your
hands out and you inhale then exhale
and then the last time when you come to
here you exhale your hands go to here
and you inhale four times and you're
gonna hold your breath for a count of
four and what you're doing is you're
your hands that you're trying to get
like what you're getting Praja your
hands are conveying the outward moving
like you get it met up but your mind is
also because you've just on this you're
also moving towards the center you're
trying to get that simultaneous
spherical movement of mind count of four
and then it was the exhale we bring our
hands here we feel the heat for inhales
rotate one way on the vertical rotate
the other and then with every right so
and then you exhale and then four
inhales here so the heart my solar
plexus sorry heart
Don Tien and then the pubic area
okay and when you're doing the pubic
area right you you tighten the sphincter
muscle put your tongue here okay
so one more time and here heart okay
advanced solar plexus sorry I don't know
why I wanted to exclude that that's a
mistake on my part
then the done T an and then the base and
then rotate it I can't demonstrate the
next went to you done this
the final one you draw up and rainy
everything drains you bring your mind
here there's um in all directions
inhale exhale collapse round deep so
this is sort of deep rows deep grounding
and then drop in the space between the
breasts inhale exhale drop inhale exhale
drop inhale exhale drop inhale
exhale drop so forth all the way through
okay I hope that was a helpful review so
let's get into position let's set your
timers and well we're going to set ours
please put your phones out do not
disturb and I believe we're ready I
think there's everything we're going to
do so we will begin when I say begin
begin
[Music]
[Music]
fully come out of your practice trying
as best you can to age greatly you
cultivated in your practice with here
everyday consciousness cognition
character and communicates perhaps by
reciting the five promises to yourself
[Music]
as I mentioned yesterday we were able to
do more questions because we have a
heart out for today because Lamar needs
to get going so today on firstly we
won't be able to get to any questions
this doesn't usually happen but we will
make up for that on Monday we answer
some questions I hope that the review
has been helpful for everyone Amanda on
Monday we will do hi a day I will do the
whole sequence of the ecology practices
as I've taught you father's farm I want
to thank you all for joining I want to
thank my dear friend and technomage Omar
and my beloved son Jason who was here
always helping they set things up and
you coping with on expectancy unexpected
contingencies please subscribe to the
channel to be notified of the next video
you'll find links to the lecture series
waking from the meaning crisis and the
via logo series voices with reveille key
explore these themes and death and
situate them within a more encompassing
framework and please invite others who
might benefit by sharing this series
please consider joining Brett is here
pleasure though discord server you'll
find people who are in this set for
doing the living practices before lectio
divina larger discussions around voices
with Rob a key waking from the meaning
crisis guests from voices were making on
their Q&A I'm on there bye-bye weekly on
Q&A so please go to the discourse ruler
to meet a community that I think will
enrich your practices and help you
cultivate wise a way of life minded
we're doing this every weekday morning
at 9:30 Eastern Time please remember
that continuity of practice is more
important than sheer quantity of
practice there's no enemy worse than
your own minded body but there's no
friend no I like no true companion on
the path
better than your own like the body he
lamps unto yourselves and to each other
take care everyone I'll see you my
Monday