[Music]
John real pleasure to speak to you from
Toronto to London thank you
for anyone who doesn't know you've been
putting out a series called awakening
from the meaning crisis for me it's
probably the most excited I've felt it's
a kind of intellectual journey since I
discovered Jordan Peterson I guess a
year and a half ago and what's kind of
amazing about it is that you guys work
in the same department yeah
we're colleagues at the University of
Toronto yeah so what are they put what
are they putting in the water at the
University of Toronto I'm not sure we
just have a lot of really good people in
that department and there are some
similarities between your work and
here's you both talk about meaning a lot
you both talk about you're not afraid to
kind of go into the mythological into
the religious what would you say are the
similarities and the differences between
your work and his okay so some of the
important similarities I think you put
your finger on it very well I think
we're both concerned with the issue of
meaning and the meaning crisis I would I
would claim in fact that I think a
significant proportion of Jordans
popularity is that he's talking about
the meaning crisis because I think it's
exigent right now and perhaps even
urgent and we are interested in the role
of myth and ritual Jordan is also I
believe interested in altered states of
consciousness so those are some of the
significant similarities I would say and
so we've we've shared a lot of students
over the past years because of this
we've spoken at multiple conferences
together because of these shared
interests Jordan also has an interest
because I had a public debate with him
if quite a while ago on what's called
the frame problem which relates to the
work I do on relevance realization so
there's a shared interest there some of
the main differences so Jordans
framework is very largely from
psychology personality theory
and from psychodynamic background Union
so I I know young and I've gone I went
through Union therapy to get an inside
understanding of it I've taken workshops
and I do some relevant work around this
so I have some understanding of it I
don't have as expertise but that that is
not the primary framework within at
which I work there framework with within
in which I work is very much a cognitive
science framework so for your listeners
who aren't familiar with it cognitive
science is an interdisciplinary science
it's designed to get the various
discourses that talk about the mind at
various levels like neuroscience the
brain machine learning information
processing psychology behavior
linguistics language to get them all to
talk to each other because they all use
very different terminology different
methods different different types of
evidence so getting them all to talk to
each other so we can get a better
understanding of how these various
different levels of the mind causally
interact and constrain each other and
also we can get a more coherent and
clearer picture of mine rather than
having this disparate disconnected
discourses about the mind so I do a lot
of work in cognitive science and I bring
that framework to bear and then in
connection with that I have I have
multiple degrees in philosophy so I also
bring in a philosophical framework
especially through the Neoplatonic
tradition in the West and the Buddhist
tradition in the East I also I practice
there's Buddhist practices I engage in
and I teach the past non-meta and I also
do Tai Chi Chuan and Qigong so I'm also
have familiarity with Taoism so I have
that as sort of a different background
than Jordan I also I have a different
take on certain aspects so areas where I
think I would be in disagreement with
Jordan is Jordan tends to pitch this as
a political issue as a confrontation
from ideologies I have sort of
principled arguments against seeing it
that way and trying to frame the meeting
crisis that way so that's one area where
I probably would significantly disagree
with him on
to try to respond to the meaning crisis
that's really lots of really interesting
things to pick up on there already and I
mean this is something that we tried to
do with rebel wisdom is to bring more of
a kind of what is the meta crisis that
is generating the political crisis
rather than what is the political crisis
per se because then you just get dragged
into these very polarized debates very
quickly I just want to sort of back up a
little bit and just ask you what is the
meaning crisis the symptoms are things
we're talking about we've got you know
incredible political adversarial and
degenerative discourse we have the
pervasive sense we talked about this
Chris and Phillip and I in the book we
actually measured it right of a sense of
increasing in the society you
know I use that term technically and we
might want to talk about that at some
point following on Frankfurt's seminal
work on but the the the
pervasive sense that is growing
and becoming permeating our society and
greater deep ingrained both detail and
scope and the increasing the this weird
the economy where everything is
politicized but people are being
politically disenfranchised they you
know voting is going down participation
in parties is going down you have
disenfranchisement from established
religious institutions you have a
failing in faith in all in most of our
political institutions definitely the
legislative increasingly judicial law
enforcement you have an increasing
default existential stance of nihilism
and cynicism often very shallow versions
of this though as pervasive through the
culture and this is also I would argue
and I think others would agree with this
exacerbating the mental health crisis so
the addiction crisis opioid crisis
things like that and how long would you
say that the meaning crisis has been in
production or how far back would you
date it so that's that's a tricky
question I think that so I talked about
these three orders
that helped to organize the various ways
in which so when you study meeting in
life people are sort of there they're
trying to they need a framework to help
them make sense
they need a framework to help them
connect to reality and connect to other
people and they need a framework that
gives them a sense of how to improve
normatively self transcendence in some
fashion and of course we had a framework
with that it was it was a it was a grand
synthesis right a sort of Christianity
and Neoplatonism and that framework has
collapsed and right in the face of a
very powerful and I would also very
important I am a scientist the
scientific framework and so I think when
we can start the dating of the meaning
crisis and in both the 12th century
believe it or not because that's when
you see that framework start unraveling
start to unravel and then that
unraveling accelerates through time the
Scientific Revolution the Protestant
Reformation have a huge accelerating
affects the Industrial Revolution as a
huge accelerating effect and now of
course the computer revolution right and
the AI revolution are having
accelerating effects social media so it
starts I would say like in the 12th
century but it's accelerating it's being
massively accelerating I think
especially in the last 20 years and just
sort of going back to Jordan Peterson a
little bit I think we spoke before we
had a we had a zoo McCall a few days ago
and you you kind of joked that Jordan
Peterson was a gateway drug to your
thinking yeah I I want it clear that you
know Jordan has been very supportive of
my work and so I don't want to in any
way come off as dismissive of him Jordan
is a very complex guy very complex
thinker but what is typically happened
at least in my anecdotal experiences
people get interested in Jordan's work I
have to be careful here there's a
selection bias I'm only getting a
certain a certain set but typically
people have come out of you know a
religious framework or an atheist
framework they've gotten introduced to
Jordans discussions about spirituality
religion and mythology and the
unconscious and then they come because
they typically want something as I've
mentioned earlier beyond the Union
framework they want a way of
incorporating that in two senses that I
don't think Jordan talks about that I I
can namely that whole cognitive
scientific framework how do we bring our
best cutting-edge cognitive science to
bear on these issues so that we can
integrate this understanding of
spirituality with the scientific
framework that's extremely important to
me by the way this integration like like
I talked about how cognitive science
integrates across the disciplines it's
very important to me that I integrate
right I respect the differences but yet
build a bridging vocabulary between what
for lack of a better term spirituality
and the scientific worldview and so
that's one reason why they come to me
the other reason is I mean I I teach you
know the passion of meditation meta Tai
Chi Chuan I teach you know I've taught
within when I had a wisdom Sangha
various you know stoic practices and
cyclic technology so people also come to
get you know well what do I actually
train how do I practice transforming
consciousness cognition character so
that's how that's how that happens so
I've heard you talk about cognitive
science quite a lot and I wasn't
familiar with the term before and I have
to say it sounds like quite a boring
term for something that when you talk
about it sounds absolutely fascinating
and and what I understand by it and
correct me if I'm wrong is that it's and
much of your work is about how we do
things so it's just how we how we think
rather than what we think and the
content of what we think and actually it
turns out that how we think is at least
it important if not more important than
what we're thinking that is a very
astute way of putting it I really want
to emphasize the process of how we make
meaning as opposed to what that you know
that meaning is its structures and
things like I want to understand the how
and I think this is directly relevant
for example in one important way to the
meaning crisis because knowledge is
about what we know but wisdom is much
more about how we know right and and so
studying this
how we know and how we make things
relevant and how we form these
connections and how we write make this
obvious salience landscaping so that my
actions and my thinking seemed just
directly and intuitively appropriate to
the circumstances that's exactly what I
want to know and that's all relevant to
wisdom we've had certainly had the sense
since we started putting films out there
that there's a real kind of intellectual
awakening going on probably facilitated
by the Internet and I guess since you've
been putting out your your films as well
you've got a sense that you've kind of
started tapping into that as well
what do you make of that what do you
make of the kind of the sense that there
is something happening so I find that
very encouraging I mean I think part of
the reason is like I said there I I do
think I've arguments in evidence and and
this is in self kind of evidence that
there is a meaning crisis people are
definitely searching and looking and
there's also I think clear frustration
with many of the answers that are on
offer in the popular culture of the
political arena even in sort of the
established religions I want to be clear
that I think there are people within the
religious framework like Jonathan pezzo
and Paul van der clay who are trying to
I think I think they need to take more
credit for what they're trying to do I
think they're trying to do a very
serious philosophical overhaul of
Christianity to try and address this
emerging crisis so there's other people
doing all of this work so that so some
of the factors there is a meeting crisis
there's the frustration with sort of
traditional established political and
even religious responses there's already
people out there who are doing this
convergent work both within cognitive
science and like I mentioned Jonathan
and Paul doing the this philosophical
restructuring or reframing of
Christianity to address this crisis so
III I'm much more hopeful about things
now because sorry every academic thinks
too highly of their own work so I'm
trying to to be careful here
but I do think it's plausible to assert
that there is also a looming sense of
crisis in general in our culture various
interactions between you know
socio-economic issues existential issues
political issues and ecological issues
and I think that's also driving this a
sense of urgency and perhaps this sort
of sense that there's a meta crisis that
all of these other crises are actually a
function of some kind of generator
function the connection I think that
you're pointing to I think is clear I'm
not sure what the order of causation is
I mean I'm a scientist so I worry about
that I would say this I think I could
say this without being in cautious the
meaning crisis exacerbates and interacts
with these other crisis crises in
important ways I'm not sure what what's
meta and what's not so but I get your
point and I think looking for the
interaction in that way is also
something that I'm pursuing in the video
series and in my work trying to get a
sense of you know how does this
cognitive cultural crisis interact with
these other crises and and you know what
are the lines of mutual and
reinforcement to use some of the
language we were talking about earlier
how is all of this self-organizing and
self-perpetuating
because until we understand that we're
going to have a very difficult time
intervening you see the problem with
self organizing systems think of your
body it's an adaptive system it's highly
self-organizing if it's perturbed if
something times to destroy it
part of what that self-organizing does
is restructure itself to adapt you get a
pathogen and your immune system kicks in
use there's a change in your environment
and your brain learns so self-organizing
systems can restructure themselves to
adapt to attempts to destroy them and if
we don't understand the self-organizing
the dynamics of the interaction of all
these crises our attempts to intervene
are one-shot attempts here and here and
here I predict are going to constantly
keep failing
because this self-organizing process is
going to adapt and preserve itself and
this this kind of intellectual awakening
that I've talked about a couple of times
I think there's there's quite a few
people who have a sense that this
conversation
there is an evolving conversation that
is kind of headed somewhere and I think
the sense of where people think feel
that it's headed to is it is an
integration of the spiritual traditions
of the religious traditions in a
meaningful way after the sort of the the
overthrow of the kind of new atheist
hegemony now there is a sense of again
rather than kind of writing off all of
these things as just sort of
superstitions and things we've evolved
past
I put the potential for an integration
of the world's wisdom traditions yes I I
would agree that's it that is exactly
how I would put it in what my sense of
it is as well so I think what's
happening is this integration and both
sides are changing right so the way
we're doing cognitive science in third
generation this is the science side the
way we're doing cognitive science and
third generation cogs is very different
from how we're doing it in first
generation right and so the science is
changing and the spirituality is they're
starting to change in this reciprocal
manner and so both are gonna have to
give ground by the way I don't have a
right term because the term I use it
sounds dismissive I try to say I'm
trying to salvage what I can from these
axial age wisdom wisdom traditions these
systemic sets of psycho technologies for
transforming you know consciousness
cognition character and community like
those are powerful we have to salvage
those and my reason for saying that is
because they they they were born from an
hour meshed in the axial revolution and
it's in its two world mythology and all
kinds of ways of trying to give us a
grammar for thinking about self
transcendence that do not mesh well do
not fit well with the scientific
worldview so all right for example I
don't like nostalgic attempts to try and
re-establish the two worldview but
neither do i do Ally countenance as you
would say this sort of the
the rejection of all of this as sort of
superstition garbage that so I'm trying
I I asked my students who are from
religions regularly and reliably do you
find what I'm doing disrespectful and
they say no you're being very respectful
and what you're doing is valuable to to
me and I think the fact that people like
Jonathan and Paul find my work valuable
he's also sort of support for that point
but so try and not get the wrong
connotations from this word but I am
trying to salvage from those wisdom
traditions right what we can't what we
know and can learn about this
meaning-making process and more
especially and importantly how to
engineer and create systemic sets of
psycho technologies that afford the
transformation and the transcendence
that people are longing for that's
what's very important we talked a minute
ago about this sort of sense of this
conversation moving somewhere and that
there is a kind of potentially an
integration I think that's what a lot of
people feel excited by is this sense of
that they can maybe not sense the
destination but they can certainly sense
that there is a trajectory to it what do
you think that integration looks like
this is what I argue and this one I'm
going to argue in this series there's
going to be two components to it right
we're going to have a historical
scientific argument that's why I spend
half of the series on history and half
of the sign of the series on cognitive
science although they overlap in many
ways right that is going to solve this
problem right we have this wonderful
scientific worldview and what we don't
have is how we fit into that scientific
worldview we do not have a scientific
explanation of how we generate
scientific explanations we do not have a
scientific explanation of how we make
the meaning systems that science
presupposes when it pursues truth
because you can't pursue truth if you
don't have meaning right so we don't
have how we fit into that we'll have an
account of that but that's that and that
account will hopefully stitch together
all of those Cartesian divides my
and embody mind in world development and
function that we are talking about
earlier but it will also help engineer
sets of psycho technologies that have to
do with something completely other so no
not not completely - spoke something
completely different see in addition to
the historical forces that generate the
meaning crisis I would argue there are
perennial problems that beset us that
there are remember we talked about how
the meta crisis is self-organizing and
that will that actually make it Swartz
our attempts to intervene so in an
analogous way the the complex
self-organization that makes your
cognition so adaptive also makes it
perennial Eve ulnar abou -
self-organizing complex processes of
self-deception and self-destructive
behavior these are perennial problems
what I'm saying is perennial II because
of right the kind of cognition and
consciousness you have the very things
that make the very factors that make
your consciousness in your cognition
adaptive make it perennial II
susceptible and vulnerable to powerful
forms of self-deception and
self-destructive behavior and so we have
always these problems and they can
undermine our agency and undermine the
meaning in our life in powerful and
profound ways we can find ourselves
caught up in addiction we can find
ourselves beset by absurdities we can
follow find ourselves a wash and despair
so many of the wisdom traditions have
the engineered psycho technologies for
addressing those perennial problems and
also affording the cultivation of self
transcendence and wisdom so people can
move to more optimal functioning and
what I think the solution will look like
is from the spiritual traditions we will
get a lot of important tutoring guidance
how to set up a culture like Steven
batcher talks about a culture of
awakening how to set up systematic sets
of psycho technology we will learn a lot
of the psycho engineering of the
systematic sets of psycho technologies
for addressing the perennial problems of
despair and absurdity self-deception and
affording the cultivation of wisdom and
transcendence and that will mesh with
this new scientific worldview which
deal with the historical development
that has led us to where we are now it
will so back up all these Cartesian
divides and we situate us back into a
worldview and that's what I see coming
together what do you think is the key
piece that you're bringing do you think
it is the cognitive science piece so I
think for me the key piece is the
cognitive science in one sense in that
it's helping me to get an understanding
of the meaning making and situate that
into a scientific framework but also the
cognitive science in its exemplification
of a method of synoptic integration this
method of the learning sort of the
ontology the epistemology the
terminology the methodology of different
discourses and bridging between them I
think that's a very relevant skill that
is needed to bridge between sort of the
scientific worldview and the the the the
the world in which we find meaning and
meaningful action and you mentioned
before about the embodied brain this is
something that it seems for quite a
while I think there was a kind of
Cartesian dualism or at least a kind of
implicit Cartesian dualism how much has
that been broken down now in in academia
so one of the banner points of their
generation cog Tsai is exactly the
attempt to get rid of some of the the
the I talked about it like in terms of
like this grammar just caught this
theoretical cultural grammar of how to
think about the mind and its
relationship to body in the mind its
relationship to the world given to us by
Descartes it's interesting because
Descartes came up with all these
dichotomies to try and address the
meaning crisis that was being generated
by the advent of the Scientific
Revolution we should pay more attention
I think to Spinoza because I think
Spinoza gives a more comprehensive
response nevertheless the old
computational metaphor right think about
it you're the saw
we're and the hardware okay so your mind
is the software and psychology studies
that and your brains the hardware and
neuroscience studies that right and so
everybody gets to keep their job it's a
great it's a great framework but when we
move to this idea of cognition as
inherently embodied in self-organizing
right what happens is the divide between
the software and the hardware it breaks
down they become interpenetrating like
in this idea of a Bioeconomy
constraining how your cognition right is
attending to information right and and
when look when the system is
self-organizing its function and its
development are also now inseparable
because it functions by developing and
it develops by functioning so you get
development and function are now wedded
together and they were separated before
and hardware and software are now wedded
together and they were separated before
and how do emotions fit into this
emotions are really important some of
your viewers might know that one of you
know one of the most important thinkers
in the last 25 years about emotion
Ronnie D'Souza is also at the University
of Toronto and you know Ronnie's work
was really important for making us
understand the rat I mean his book his
seminal book is the rationality of
emotions so you know really attacking
that sort of decadent romantic idea we
have of this nth if assists and
antagonism between reason and emotion
and you have to choose one rather than
the other which is a very strange thing
we think of that as natural and that's
such a mistake because if you go before
like the Romantic period even go back
for example into Plato in the whole neo
platonic tradition love and reason are
deeply into defined and intermeshing I
mean philosophy ax means the love of
wisdom right a philosophy so what Ronnie
helped to do was show how important
emotions are to our rational agency and
then there's been a lot of work like
people like DiMaggio in his book des
cartes error Montague reads book and
your brain is almost perfect talking
about the fundamental difference between
us and computers as we care and we have
to
about the information we're processing
it's precisely because you care that you
could do right this this selecting
what's obvious so like you know DiMaggio
studied people and Descartes Sarah where
there they have a kind of brain damage
so the computational part of the brain
is working great they can do great
you know puzzle solving and calculation
and the inferential stuff on an IQ test
but if you sort of did this with him if
you said here's a red ink pen and here's
a blue ink pen which one do you want to
write the test with they'll go ah
because they try to calculate all the
possible permutations right because the
capacity to care and right and to be
moved
that's what emotions do for you anger is
just a powerful way in which your
Bioeconomy creates a salience landscape
so that action and identities are
obvious to you does it work perfectly no
nothing can we have to give up that
cartesian idea that there's something
like a cognitively perfect form of
cognition but do our emotions absolutely
central to your cognitive agency
definitely we should go we should we we
have to see reason and emotion as deeply
interdependent and intered affine and
the the idea of the embodied brain how
widespread is that how is this sort of
is what you're doing in cognitive
science sort of cutting edge or is this
sort of becoming the accept of wisdom
somewhere between those two I think the
ideas of embodied cognition third
generation Clark's I are I wouldn't say
it's consensus in cognitive science but
definitely mainstream although some of
the best cutting-edge theoretical work
is still being done there
what's heartening to me for example is
that these ideas that are becoming more
prevalent to machine learning in one
Emily in one sense and that are
definitely becoming more prevalent in
cognitive science and the philosophy of
mind are now permeating into psychology
and what is the kind of real-world
impact of this cognitive science it does
it suggests that we that we should all
be doing certain embodied
if we want to kind of improve our
cognition what what does it kind of
what's the real world relevance of it
well there's there's two in very
different directions I mean one myself
in Evin for example and other people
Francisco Varela there is this growing
confluence between third generation cog
saw and traditional sets of psycho
technologies for altering consciousness
and cognition like Buddhism and Taoist
practices I even have a course at the
University of Toronto called Buddhism
and cog side where I try and talk about
and explore that that confluence it was
actually the progenitor to the video
series in important ways and I'm very
grateful for the opportunity to teach
that course and so I think that's
definitely the case but the other thing
I think there's other I think it's
giving us a way and this is also part of
the real world impact I think it's
giving and this really matters it's
giving people a new vocabulary for
talking about existential and spiritual
meaning and transformation that I think
is really really important people need
to be able to articulate their
experience to remove you know confusion
equivocation to properly align cognitive
processes for causal efficacy all of
this is afforded by this enriched and I
think empowering vocabulary and then the
third thing is one that is going it has
been and is going to increasingly make
an impact on the meaning crisis which is
the advent of you know autonomous
artificial general intelligence which is
coming that that is definitely coming
and that's gonna make an impact on our
existential self understanding greater I
will predict than the Scientific
Revolution and the Industrial Revolution
in something we've noticed in the people
that we've interviewed so far the the
people that I found that have been the
most interesting bringing forth the most
kind of fascinating perspectives often
have a kind of either familiarity with
or a yeah relationship with what I might
call the liminal space there's some
sense that they're able to tap into a
sort of a space beyond themselves does
that make any sense at all for a
scientist I think I do understand what
you're saying as a cognitive scientist
and also as John brave a key because one
of the things that I'm doing not myself
alone other people like I would point
your your viewers to the really
important work of La Paul she literally
wrote the book on transformative
experience called transformative
experience I mean and this is really you
know this is really tough rigorous but
nevertheless beautifully written
philosophy right cognitive science and I
I've had the pleasure to talk to Laurie
at each guest lecture in one of her
classes and so more and more people and
this is what we do in the consciousness
and wisdom study lab my lab at the
University we're studying these
transformative experiences where people
are having things like mystical
experiences awakening experiences and
they have a sense of a deeper
connectedness to a deeper level of
reality and I don't think that's a
mistake I'm sort of placing my cognitive
scientific bet on the fact that and I
make arguments to this effect and I talk
about this and it's one publishing work
on that these higher states of
consciousness really are important and
constitutive of you know optimizing our
cognition again not in terms of what see
the problem that we've had is that we've
concentrated on the what that these prop
these states give us and I think that
has been a fundamental mistake I think
it's inevitable that it happens because
people have to talk about it share it
with others and then that it gets it
meshed right and that's fine but I think
the how of these states the way they
optimize our relevance realization
transform it and enable something sort
of analogous to the way what you see in
child development where children are
sort of locked in schematic ways of
thinking and they make all of these
systematic errors and then they have you
know appear as yet en you know change
and they go from one stage to another
and although that system of illusions
that they were prey to has
in a way and I think you see the same
kind of attempt to become sensitive to
and be able to intervene in systemic
sets of illusion that beset sort of
normal adult cognition and consciousness
and people through these transformative
experiences get better in the how they
optimize better how to get a grip on
reality to connect to reality and to get
this sort of reciprocal realization they
are being opened up and reality are
being opened up in a coupled reciprocal
manner and I think that is all something
that cognitive science is and will
increasingly say more and more about so
are you saying that these kind of
awakening experiences are part of our
development I don't want to sound like I
don't want to make it sound like an
inevitable thing right I think what they
are is they they are a genuine option
for us for a form of self transcendence
that we can render scientifically
legitimate by understanding the way it
optimizes the how of our cognitive
meaning making and the evolution of that
meaning making what so I I need a little
bit more specific I mean I can talk
about how sort of we evolved as a
species that I can talk about the
cultural of evolution like things like
the actual revolution and I understand
that and I do think part of what the
series has tried to do is point out the
deep connection between the invention of
psycho technologies and their
internalization and then that how that
transforms the how of cognition let me
give you a a a I think a
non-controversial example so one of the
things I would argue that drove and many
people would agree with this is not just
my claim that drove the the axial
revolution of around 800 BC to 300 BC
this is when the great world religions
were being invented philosophy is being
invented Buddhism's being that all this
is being invented right Karl Jasper's
originally put his finger on this Karen
Armstrong has wrote a really good book
on this called the great transformation
anyways one of the things that's going
on especially in the eastern
Mediterranean is
the invention of alphabetic literacy
right so before that you have like
ideograph like I have like ideograms a
tattooed on my arm right but you have
India graphic higher grip you have all
these very complex and and so being
literate is a very demanding thing in
fact your job in the ancient world is
you can be ascribed which means your
only job is and it's a good job is
you're literate alright and so a small
percentage of the population is literate
when you get alphabetic literacy the the
really amount some people I think have
estimated it it's well surround 20% of
the population becomes literate right
now think about what that psycho
technology does to you does for you okay
you have deeply internalized it it is so
automatic to you right if I put a word
up in front of you and say look at this
and don't read it you won't be able to
do it right it's absolutely transparent
it's so internalized to your cognition
you probably think in sentences in your
head but think about what literacy does
to your cognition okay it I can now
store my thoughts external to me and I
can come back later and revise them so I
could connect previous instances of my
brain to current instances that
massively increases right the processing
power I can I can link my processing to
your processing I can step back and look
at it at length rather than trying to
hold it in working memory all of this
means I can massively self-correct my
own cognition so try and do this thought
experiment with me think about all the
problems you're solving day to day basis
all the information you're processing
now I take literacy from you most of
those problems are now insoluble by you
you can't you can't do it you can't
process the information you can't access
the information you can't hold the
information you can't distribute the
information that's what psycho
technologies do and what happens is they
get invented for practical purposes but
then they get internalized they permeate
the functionality of our cognition and
then they transform us
so people because are things like
alphabetic literacy because of the
increased power and the increased
awareness of their own cognition they
got a much greater sense of how this
meaning making in their
mind distorts reality and that's what
helps afford the whole axle revolution
so our cognition is there's a cognitive
cultural evolution to our cognition so
that things we take to be natural are
actually internalized via psycho
technologies from our culture and and
and of course the internet and other
things that our smartphones are also
doing that we are naturally born cyborgs
are our brains evolved to internalize
these psycho technologies and physical
technologies and the thing about the
internet is it that's doing it in a huge
ways we don't yet understand great place
to to end John for everyone watching
really highly recommend John series
awakening from the meaning crisis and I
think you're gonna do 50 episodes all
together yep that's right I'm not going
to ask you how it ends now because I
don't want to give it away for anyone
okay yeah we've already filmed 28 and so
the filming is ongoing but we're
definitely committed to 50 great real
pleasure speaking to John this was a
great pleasure for me thank you very
much you're a great at Milwaukee
[Music]
you
[Music]