[Music]
hello Vancouver thank you hello all
right so we have an interesting
situation here obviously this is part
two and a few of you were here for what
took place last night
we are going to find a way to catch you
all up pretty quick on what took place
but before we do that I thought it might
make sense to talk to you about where we
are in this discussion and why it
matters and it matters not just for
those of us on stage but it matters very
much for you all in the audience the
point is basically this we've arrived at
a place in history where the sense
making apparatus that usually helps us
figure out what to think about things
has obviously begun to come apart
the political parties the the
universities journalism all of these
things have stopped making sense an
alternative sense making networks have
begun to rise and the one that we end up
being a part of seems to be beating the
odds with respect to staying alive and
being a vibrant part of the conversation
but that depends on something it depends
on our ability to upgrade what we can
discuss and navigate and Sam and Jordan
have run afoul of each other in the past
as you all know and so our ability to
upgrade the conversations such that
they're able to to find common ground
and for us to move forward together is
potentially very important a very
important upgrade now that upgrade in
the modern era includes you all because
our conversation and your conversations
are all now linked through the internet
so the ground rules for tonight involve
you not filming what takes place on
stage tonight and the reason for that is
because what takes place on stage
tonight has consequences and the freer
that Sam and Jordan feel to use new
tools to try out positions that maybe
they haven't explored before the more
likely we are to succeed so please don't
film but that does not mean that we
don't
you talking about what was discussed
here tonight in fact we're very excited
to see what you all make of this
conversation and where it heads so in an
effort to to get you up to speed on
where we got yesterday and I think the
evidence is strong we all felt and the
discussion online suggests that we
actually accomplished quite a bit
yesterday that we made headway in an
effort to attempt to keep that momentum
going but we are going to do is we are
going to have Sam and Jordan Steelman
each other's points from last night so
that you can hear what that sounds like
now for those of you who have ever tried
steel Manning somebody's point with whom
you have a severe disagreement you know
just how hard this is so let's give them
some leeway Sam would you be willing to
start sure sure yeah thank you okay well
first let me just make the the obvious
point that that probably isn't so
obvious unless you take the time to put
yourself in our shoes but just imagine
how surreal it is for us to be who we
are simply having a conversation about
ideas and to be able to put a date on
the calendar and have all of you show up
for this it's just an amazing privilege
and thank you for coming out
so so here is what I think Jordan things
I'm getting wrong I think that was
grammatically correct maybe there's
another note in there but clearly I
don't understand how valuable stories
are how deep they go the degree to which
stories encode not only the wisdom of
our ancestors but quite possibly the
wisdom born of the hard knocks of
evolution of the species right so
there's no telling how deep the
significance of the information encoded
in stories goes and there's a class of
stories that are religious stories and
they're religious for a reason because
they're dealing with the the deepest
questions in human life they're
questions about what constitutes a good
life what's worth living for what's
worth dying for these are things that if
each individual just thrust from on to
the stage of his own life
not knowing where he is and tasked with
figuring out how to live all on his own
or even in a in a collection of others
who are similarly unguided by ancient
wisdom that this is not knowledge we can
we can recapitulate for ourselves easily
and so we we edit or ignore the these
ancient stories at our peril at some
minimum at some considerable risk
because we don't know how much we don't
really know what baby is in the bath
water and so we should have immense
respect for these traditions and the
this is well this is have to be
discovered tonight I'm still not quite
clear about how this links up with with
more metaphysical propositions about the
origins of these of certain of these
stories but at minimum
my criticism of religion because it
tends to focus on the the most obvious
case of zero-sum contest between
religious dogmatism and you know
scientific open-ended discussion is
doesn't address this core issue of the
significance of religious thinking and
religious narrative because I am for the
most part just shooting fish in a barrel
criticizing fundamentalists and the kind
of God that the fundamentalists believe
in the God who's an invisible person who
hates homosexuals obviously that's not
the the deep the deepest version of
these religious this or this what is a
narrative technology for orient in human
life in the cosmos so maybe I'll leave
it there but that's I think what Jordan
things
before you steal man Sam's point how did
you feel about his encapsulation of
yours know what I mean well I got a
couple of things to say about it it's
like first of all I think it was
accurate concise fair I also think that
this is a more technical note in some
sense is that if if you ever want to
think about something that's exactly
what you have to do right you want to
take arguments that are against your
perspective and you want to make them as
strong as you possibly can so that you
can fortify your arguments against them
you don't want to make them weak because
that just makes you weak and so you know
Sam and I are both scientists and it
really is the case that what scientists
are trying to do and I think what we're
actually trying to do in this
conversation genuinely is to try to find
out if there's something that we're
thinking that's stupid you know because
when when I'm laying out the arguments
that Sam just summarized so well I've
tried to generate a bunch of opposition
to them in my own imagination and their
arguments I put forward are ones I can't
undermine but that doesn't mean they're
right it doesn't mean that at all and so
if someone comes along who's and this is
certainly the case if you're a scientist
who's worth his or her salt if someone
comes along and says hey look you've
made a mistake in this fundamental
proposition it's like yes great that
means I can make progress towards a more
solid theory of being so and that's what
we're trying to do and I do think it's
working and so I thought that was just
fine
exactly dead-on and I hope I can do
justice to your position as well so okay
so I'm gonna summarize Sam's argument
briefly and then I'm gonna tell them
late late let you guys know why he
thinks I'm things of what things I'm not
taking into account so Sam believes that
there are two fundamental dangers to
psychological and social stability
religious fundamentalism essentially on
the right and moral relativism and
nihilism on the left and so the danger
of the right wing position is that it
enables people to arbitrarily establish
certain revealed axioms as indisputable
truths and then
to tyrannize themselves and other people
with the claims that those are divine
revelations and he sees that as part of
the danger of religious fundamentalism
and maybe religious thinking in general
but also is something that characterizes
secular totalitarian states that also
has a religious aspect so that's on the
right and then on the left well the
problem with the with the moral
relativism nihilism position is that it
leaves us with no orientation and it
also flies in the face of common sense
observations that there are ways to live
that are bad and that there are ways to
live that are good that people can
generally agree on and that statements
about those general agreements about how
to live can be considered factual now so
and and then the next part of Sam's
argument is that we require a value
system that allows us to escape these
twin dangers one stultified us and the
other leaves us hopeless let's say and
that value system has to be grounded in
something real and the only thing that
he can see that actually constitutes
real in any provable sense and there's a
certain amount of historical and
conceptual weight behind this claim is
the domain of empirical facts as they've
been manifested in the sciences and
technologies that have made us
incredibly powerful and increasingly
able to flourish in the world and so we
need to ground our value propositions in
something that we've been able to
determine has genuine solidity to so
that we can so that we can orient
ourselves properly so that we can make
moral claims and that we can avoid these
to in dangers we can begin with some
basic facts that we can identify as I
mentioned breathe briefly what
constitutes a bad life endless pain
suffering anxiety tremendous amount of
negative emotions short term lifespan
all the things that no one would choose
voluntarily for themselves if if we
would all agree that they were thinking
in a healthy manner and we can contrast
that sort of domain of horror with the
good life which might involve while
certainly freedom from privation and
want and undue threat and anxiety and
hope for the future and all of that and
that we can agree that those are poles
good bad and good and that that's a
factual claim so he Sam also claims that
we can define the good life this is an
extension of it with reference to
flourishing and well-being and that that
can actually be measured
we should and can't inform the idea of
flourishing and well-being with
empirical data having said all that he
also leaves
what would a domain of inquiry open that
would be centered on the possibility
that some of the ideas that have been
encapsulated in religious phenomenology
if not in religious dogma might be worth
pursuing as well that there might be
wisdom that can practically be applied
in terms of perception to to spiritual
practices although those become danger
when dangerous increasingly dangerous as
they become ensconced in dogma and so
that's Sam's position and then his
criticism of my ideas he would say that
it's facts not stories that constitute
the ground for the proper science of
well-being and that we don't need to be
connected to stories ancient stories in
particular to thrive and the reason for
that are that these ancient stories are
pathological in certain details
especially in the specific claims they
make up which which look outrageous in
some sense from a modern moral
perspective and he believes that it's
hand-waving to ignore those specific
topics and with a you know with of what
would you call it an optimistic overview
of the entire context that they're
they're dangerously outdated now if they
ever were useful that they're subject to
too many potential interpretations for
any modern usage to be reliably derived
and so he believes that attempts to
interpret these stories let's say are
rife with so many potential errors of
bias and interpretation and subjectivity
that all the interpretations in some
sense are unreliable and perhaps equally
unreliable that they're dated that worse
than that not only are they unreliable
but they're dangerous insofar as the
claims they lay out are pose a threat to
scientific and enlightenment values
which are the true saviors of humanity
as evidenced by our progress let's say
over the last two or three hundred years
and that they're also susceptible to the
totalitarian interpretation
which I described earlier which confer
upon the interpreter a sense of and then
a claim to revealed truth and so I would
say that Sam's argument and his and his
criticisms of my position so ok so you
write my next book I'll write yours
Sam how do you feel about that
characterization of your position
certainly close enough to get the
conversation started I mean there's a
few the grounding stuff where we have
yet to talk about and I'm not as I'm not
as much a stickler for materialistic
scientific empiricism as I heard implied
there but we can we can come okay so
hold on yep I think from the point of
view of the audience this is a this is a
good barometer of where we got to last
night and I think actually the gains are
really impressive which I have to say is
spooking me because of something called
regression to the mean now if I catch
either one of you regressing to the mean
tonight I will hunt you down and I will
ridicule you on Twitter tomorrow so you
have been warned okay all right so do
either one of you want to now talk about
what was missing from the other
characterization or how do you want to
move I think we should touch this issue
of metaphorical truth because I think it
still gets that the distance between us
sure and say and it's and happily yeah
this is your phrase that you have you
might want to do you want to prop up
this phrase why not so the idea of
metaphorical truth which I think
actually is the reconciliation between
at least the points that you guys each
started out with is the idea that there
are concepts which are literally false
that we can falsify in a scientific
rational sense but that if you behave as
if they were true you come out ahead of
where you were if you behave according
to the fact that they are false and so
to call these things simply false is an
error in effect the universe has left
them true in some sense other than a
purely literal one and so
religions would then according to
actually what you heard from both Sam
and Jordan religions would fall into
this class of things these are
encapsulations of stories and
prescriptions that if you follow them
irrespective of whether they literally
describe the universe you end up with
advantages that you may not know why
they are there but nonetheless you you
are ahead of your you you're ahead of
your position if you were to navigate
just simply on your your perceptions
that's the concept yes I think there's a
good analogy that you and I stumbled
onto after we did a podcast together you
had a an analogy about a porcupine that
could shoot its quills which many people
balked at but a listener gave us a
better one which was the idea that
anyone has worked with guns at all must
have heard this admonishment to treat
every gun as if it is loaded right and
you actually when I last night when I
allege that you believed in God you
corrected me said no you live as if God
exists right and so this seems like
there's a connection here so if you're
if you know if I had a gun here that I
wanted to show Brett if I know anything
about guns I'm going to make damn sure
that it's unloaded right I'm going to
pull back the slide I'm going to drop
the magazine pull back the slide check
the chamber and do this in a redundant
fashion that that really looks like I'm
suffering from obsessive-compulsive
disorder maybe it is truly redundant and
then I'll hand it to Brad and if Brett
knows anything about guns he will do the
same thing having just seen me do it and
if he hands it back to me again I will
do the same thing even though there may
be no ammunition around right so it
really is crazy at the level of our
explicit knowledge of a situation and
yet absolutely necessary to do and it's
it's not merely its it runs very deep I
mean I would have bent that whole time
you you're careful not to point the
barrel of the gun at anything you would
be afraid to shoot and when people fail
to live this way around guns they with
some unnerving frequency actually shoot
themselves or people close to them by
accident so it is really the only proper
hedge against just the the odds of being
in proximity to loaded weapons and yet
if someone in the middle of this
operation came up to us and said you
know actually there's a casino that just
opened across the street that will take
your bets about whether or not guns are
loaded would you like to bet a million
dollars as to whether or not this gun is
loaded well of course I would bet those
million dollars every time that it's not
loaded because I know it's not loaded
right so there's there's a there's a
literal truth and a a metaphorical truth
well you know otherwise known as a very
useful fiction which in this case is
actually more useful than the truth
right but the only way I can understand
its utility is and and even utter the
phrase metaphorical truth in a way
that's comprehensible is in the context
of distinguishing it from literal truth
and yep
this is fascinating Sam actually this is
this is I think next Jason I'm a little
worried by how excited you are about
this so I have a little story that might
be helpful about that and so on you
could you could tell me what what you
think about okay think about this okay
so so one of the things that I've been
reconsidering since we talked last night
is is the nature of our dispute about
the relationship between facts and
values because I I think I can make a
case that what I've been trying to do
especially in my first book was to
ground values in facts but I'm not doing
it the same way that you are exactly so
so I don't want to make that a point of
contention so and I'll get to that in a
moment but with regards to this metaphor
truth let me tell you something you tell
me what you think about this so one of
the things that's been observed by
anthropologists worldwide is that human
beings tend to make sacrifices so I'm
gonna spend two minutes three minutes
laying out a sacrificial story and the
reason I want to do it is because see
what I think happened with regards to
the origin of these profound stories is
that people first started to behave in
certain ways that had survival
significance and that was selected for
and as a consequence of the standard
selection practices and so that was
instantiated in behavior and then
because we can observe ourselves because
we're self-conscious creatures that we
started to make representations of those
patterns and dramatize them and then
encapsulate them in stories so it's a
bottom up from from me so it would be
sort of like chimpanzees or wolves
become aware of their dominance
hierarchy structures and the strategies
that they use so a wolf for example if
two wolves are having a dominance
dispute one the wolf that gives up first
lays down puts his neck open so the
other wolf can tear it out and then the
other wolf doesn't and you could say
well it's as if a wolf is following a
rule about not killing a weaker member
of the pack of course wolves don't have
rules they have behavioral patterns but
a self-conscious wolf would watch what
the Wolves were doing and then say well
it's as if we're acting out the idea
that each wolf in the pack has intrinsic
value and then that starts to be any
maybe the wolves would have a little
story about that the heroic forbearing
wolf that doesn't tear out the neck of
its opponents and that that's a good
wolf well that's good wolf ethics and
and and so but it's grounded but it's
grounded in the actual behavior okay so
let's we'll put that aside for a second
now here's the sacrificial story so
human beings have made sacrifices it
seems to be a standard practice all
around the world and in the biblical
narratives they would often sacrifice
something of value like like a valuable
animal like a child startling look look
I'm not I'm not making light of this I
know that human sacrifice was a part of
this but that's again to just to just to
give you a crib on where my mind goes
here's human human sacrifice is as old a
religious precept as we know about yeah
it's a cultural Universal the the other
sacrifices are derivation from it and
circumcision is a surrogate for the far
more barbaric act of human sacrifice and
you know it answers every test you would
put to it with respect to its archetypal
significance it's it's compelling
presence in stories across all cultures
but the horror is that it actually has
taken place in all these cultures based
on licit beliefs in the presence of just
just right Arthur casts of scientific
ignorant Arthur Kessler used that as the
argument for the essential insanity of
humanity we have know but it's not just
the insanity of humanity it's the the
misapprehension of the causal structure
of the cosmos that you don't know what
Naturals the weather you don't know why
people get sick you think your neighbor
is capable of casting magic spells on
you you're ignorant of everything and
you're trying to force some order on
things and so when you don't in the
absence of engineers and you don't know
why bill certain buildings fall down you
actually can agree with your neighbor
that maybe you should bury your
firstborn child into every post hole of
this new building which in fact has took
place and it's the consequence of
ignorance and so that the problem is if
you're only going to talk about purifies
notion of sacrifice very strange
consequence of ignorance like wait it's
the notion that we're in relationship to
invisible others that can that can
mistreat us based on a lot having
offered enough where we are but not not
precisely those others well but we're in
relationship to the invisible others who
will judge us in the future okay but
you're changing you're changing the noun
in important ways no but I'm also trying
to understand and I'm not trying to
argue against the horror of child
sacrifice no I would never imagine I
know I know unless but I'm also yeah but
I'm also trying but my work would be
much easier if you did that hahaha
yes yes yes and the work of journalists
as well we've tried that right so right
that would be that would even be worse
than enforced monogamy
hypothetical oh so okay so see I'm let's
say that I'm trying to give the devil
his due and I'm trying to understand
from an evolutionary perspective like a
cognitive behavioral evolutionary
perspective let's say why that
particular set of ideas would emerge and
in many many many places perhaps
autonomously or once having emerged
would spread like wildfire it's like
because I'm not willing to only
attribute it to ignorance now we could
attribute it to ignorance no problem man
but but there's more going on there
because it is a human Universal and like
there's all sorts of things that happen
in nature as a consequence of biological
and evolutionary processes that don't
work out well for our current state of
moral intuition okay so one of the
things because I've been thinking about
this sacrificial motif for a very long
time you're trying to figure out what
that what what the hell's the idea here
exactly and so so here's one way of
thinking about it if you give up
something of value now you can gain
something of more value in the future
okay so let's think about that idea for
a minute so the first thing is that's um
that's a hell of an idea that's delay
delay delay that's right that's the
discovery of the future as well and so
you might say well the notion of
sacrifice is exactly the same thing as
the discovery of the future if we give
up something we really value now we can
make a pact with the structure of
existence itself such that better things
will happen to us in the future now okay
now what's weird about this and it's
hard to understand is that it works so
when I talk to my students for example
and I say what did your parents
sacrifice to send you to university many
of them are children of first-generation
immigrants and so like man they're on
that story in a second right they know
all sorts of things that their parents
sacrificed and they're delaying
gratification in the present for a
radically delayed return in the future
now you think animals general
speaking they might act out the idea of
delayed gratification as a consequence
of running out their instincts but they
don't conceptualize it it's not obvious
that animals give up something they
value right now in order to thrive in
the future there's an old story about
how to catch a monkey right so yeah you
put a jar up with rocks in it then you
put little candies and it's a narrow
neck jar you put little candies on top
of the rocks put a few candies in front
of the of the jar then the monkey comes
along and picks up the candies puts his
hand in the jar grabs the candies and
can't get it out I still don't know if
this actually works on monkeys or it was
just a great story oh I don't know I
don't know either
and then I've heard I've heard I've
heard various claims but but but the
point is you can go pick up the monkey
he won't let go of the candidates now
perhaps he would but the the the issue
is is that it's not obvious that animals
will forego an immediate gratification
for a future gratification I don't think
I don't think that's right actually and
actually one a-hole well the question is
can will they do it consciously they
might act it out they act it out that's
not the issue it's very hard to know if
it's conscious and so on to the
questionnaires but I know I know and it
and obviously the line between acting it
out and becoming starting to consciously
represent it is a tenuous one but what
looks to me like what happened is that
after we observed that people who were
capable of delaying gratification
sacrifice things that they valued in
order to obtain a future goal and it
worked that we started to codify that as
a representation and then started to act
it out and so so the story and and you'd
say well that produced strange variants
but but there's a reason for that - as
far as I can say so imagine this imagine
that there's a rule of thumb sacrificing
what you've find valuable now will
ensure certain benefits in the future
well then the question becomes how good
could those future benefits be and so
that might be heavenly let's say in the
archetypal extreme and what's the
ultimate sacrifice that you have to
perform and then I would say well the
child sacrifice it fits into that
category and so it's it's as if those
ideas were pushed to their radical
extreme and you could say well that's a
pathological extreme it's like well it
is
is a pathological extreme but but I
think we also have to understand that
some of the things that we've learned as
we've evolved towards our current state
of wisdom such as it is is that they
were learned in a very bloody and
catastrophic way they were learning with
incredible difficulty and delay of
gratification was certainly one of those
because it's a hell of a thing to learn
when you're in conditions of privation
okay yeah well I think that the issue
here for me is that you don't need a
conception of you don't need any kind of
positive gloss on human sacrifice as a
meme or as an archetype in order to form
a coherent picture of the future that
can motivate you so delayed delayed
gratification is fully separable from a
notion that it might ever be rational or
good to sacrifice a child as an offering
to an invisible other that doesn't how
do you know it's separable because
that's the developmental history as you
said well that's a sacrifice even if I
oh yeah I think it's I think it is in
fact historically separable but let's
just say it's not let's just say as a
matter of our origins they're united
they're of a piece it's just it is the
genetic fallacy to care about that
origin I mean there are say that the
that is the only path forward toward a
notion of the future given where we've
come from or that it's somehow necessary
to venerate now or that it's good do we
take that but we do venerate the idea of
sacrifice now but I would say but I
would say we do it to to the detriment
of our moral intuitions in the religious
context so for instance I think that
that the notion that Christianity
Christianity is actually a cult of human
sacrifice a Christianity is not a
religion that repudiates human sacrifice
Christianity is a religion that says
actually no human sacrifice is necessary
and there was only one that in fact was
necessary and effective and that's the
sacrifice of Jesus and I think that is
when you dig into the details not only a
morally
interesting vision of our circumstance
and how we are how we can be redeemed
it's morally abhorrent
right so I think there's a better
version okay let me ask you a question
about that so in in in in the moral
landscape you lay out this pathway
there's the bad life and there's the
good life right and and you you
described what they were and the bad
life is a variation of hellish
circumstances and the good life is a
variant of hypothetically the life that
we would like to lead and your
conception is that and correct me if I'm
wrong your conception is that the proper
pathway forward so that would be the
moral endeavor is to move away from the
bad and towards the good okay and so far
as we understand which way is up yes yes
the basic claim is that we can be right
or wrong with respect to we do we don't
necessarily know how to do that in an
unerring manner and and we could subject
that to approximation correction along
the way and we should but we can outline
the broad scheme you know just progress
away from hell towards something that's
positive yes yes okay so I would say
that there's an implicit claim in that
that you should sacrifice everything in
you that isn't serving that to that and
I would say that that's essentially the
same claim that's made in Christianity
well again that is a I may understand
the impulse to uplevel these barbaric
ignorance derived beliefs right to
something that is morally that is
interesting and palatable in in in the
current context and I understand you can
do that my concern there is you can do
that with everything I mean you could do
it with witchcraft why not do the exact
same thing you're doing with religion to
the history of witchcraft witchcraft is
as as as well water I just would do that
so that's a perfectly yeah but so it's
but it's say that should be of concern
there's there are reasons why we don't
want to endorse martyrs which raft right
absolutely and so so you know what I
mean I'm not talking in modern
witchcraft currently exist I mean you go
to Africa there
there you know people are hunting
albinos for their body parts because
they believe in sympathetic magic and
they and kids get killed as witches so
this belief indoors in certain pockets
of humanity and we're right too about
just think at a certain point you have
to acknowledge that some ideas are not
only wrong but they're their effects or
disastrous or have been disastrous or
will likely be even if good and certain
circumstances will likely be disastrous
in the future and then we shouldn't be
hostage to these these ancient memes we
shouldn't have to figure out how to make
the most of the worst idea that anyone's
ever had which is you should maybe you
should sacrifice your firstborn child to
be a being you've never seen hold on Sam
I I want to hold your feet to the fire
here look at it two points one
interesting observation when you
presented the example so on your podcast
I had argued that believing that
porcupines can throw their quills might
protect you from a porcupine that might
wheel around even though porcupines
can't for other quills your listener
sent the better example which was all
guns are loaded when you presented it
you didn't say all guns are loaded well
you said treat all guns as if they are
loaded which is I think the same reflex
that you have faced with any
metaphorical truth which is that it can
always be unpacked but it's actually
that's the way Jordan talks about
believing in God as well right and
actually so so this is but then if we
take something like you so you say all
right sacrifice of children is abhorrent
let's say it is and then you say well
Christianity hasn't forgone the
sacrifice of children in fact it's
described one child who is sacrificed
for everybody else but arguably that's
an upgrade of some metaphorical truth
that frees those who are adhering to
this tradition from ever considering
sacrificing a child and does is it
provides a motivational structure that
may in fact have very positive
outgrowths though not literal the idea
that someone would have said
their own child for the benefit of
everybody else not to have to that idea
might engender a large amount of good
work that would result as Jordans point
let me just concede that the hardest
case for me I met which I did up top
just in defining when after you define
metaphorical truth and I use the gun
example there's certainly cases where
the useful fiction is more useful than
the truth I would grant that but you
know I think those cases are few and far
between but handling guns is one of them
it's just not useful when when the
casino opens across the street and you
can place a million-dollar bet right
then you want you want to have some
purchase on the literal truth so you
want to be able to and and again this is
psychologically interesting because and
I keep coming back to the gun example
because the one that that is viscerally
real to me like if I have a real gun
that I know to be unloaded I still
emotionally can't treat it as a harmless
object I can't point it at my child just
for the fun of it because you know that
we're gonna play cops and robbers now
with a real gun right this this yeah I
have a I have a superstitious attachment
to always be in safe with the gun right
and it's and it's important it's
important that that get ingrained and
yet it is not strictly right it's not
irrational because it has good effects
but it's it's not actually in register
with what I know to be true factually in
each moment right so very low cost
yes very it's very low cause it's not
divided in societies and causing people
to go to war and if you were gonna teach
a child gun safety you would want to
encode this so that they would
automatically know never to behave as if
a gun is unloaded because that's what
gets you into trouble as an adult every
every gun owner recognizes the
distinction between the metaphorical
truth and the literal truth here but I
guess what I suspect is going on here is
that you
mechanism for dealing with the world
involves unpacking all of these things
and I think it's highly productive but
it also means that you have a hard time
understanding why anybody would do
anything different and that's the
question is just because we can track
fully the difference between guns
actually all being loaded and behaving
as if all guns are loaded right that one
there's no leftover there's nothing
there's no mystery they're right but
there may be many of these things for
which there is some difficulty lining up
the metaphorical truth with the literal
truth and operating according to the
metaphorical truth might have advantages
which I think is what you're getting at
so well so here's here's another
situation because you know we have to
remember what kind of catastrophic past
we emerged from and how much privation
ruled the world prior to 1895
essentially and certainly the farther
back you go the more bloody and horrible
it was I mean how often do you think it
was necessary and this is not obviously
something I'm in favor of and this is
also one of these situations where we
get to play with ideas that we might not
otherwise play with how often do you
think it was necessary for people in the
past who had absolutely no access to
birth control and who didn't have enough
food to sacrifice a child for the
survival of their family I mean god only
knows yeah
and that's it well but that's worth
thinking about it's like you know life
is unbelievably cruel and difficult and
one of the problems that comes when you
discover the future is that you might
have to make the most painful of
sacrifices and lots of lots of archaic
people do this sort of thing they do
that with their elderly people they do
that with sick people they do that with
infants that they deemed too fragile to
survive like so part of child sacrifice
and I know the literature on child
sacrifice reasonably well part of child
sacrifice seemed to emerge out of the
observable necessity to leave someone
behind so that everyone else didn't die
and we don't know how often that had to
happen in the past it might have had to
happen a lot right now obviously just
just in the interest of kind of
conceptual clarity here human sacrifice
is
a larger horror than that so you have it
was very common is the sacrificing of
you know captive so you take the Aztec
sacrifices where you you know if you now
have slaves some of whom you're going to
the Aztecs sacrificed about twenty five
thousand people a year yeah yeah look I
mean it's it's clearly a bloody mess
there's no doubt about that but you know
one of the things that you see happening
in the biblical narrative which is
extraordinarily interesting is that you
see echoes of child sacrifice at the
beginning but what happens is the
sacrificial notion gets increasingly
psychologize Dazz the story progresses
so you know you see that transition with
abraham and isaac where that where the
sacra the child sacrifice is actually
forbidden although previously demanded
by god and then you also see it as you
already laid out in the substitution of
the circumcision for the idea of
sacrifice itself and then what seems to
happen see I'm trying to figure out how
these ideas develop psyche
psychologically from their behavioral
underpinnings is that eventually it
becomes psychologize completely so you
can say well we can we can conceptualize
a sacrifice in the abstract so my
parents can sacrifice to send me to
university without anything or anyone
having to die it transforms itself from
something that's enacted out as a
dramatic ritual into something that's a
psychological reality but all that blood
and catastrophe along the way as part of
the process by which the idea comes to
emerge right definitely so what is the
connection of all of this because yes so
there is this history and I would argue
we are busily trying to outgrow much of
it if not most of it and whether it's
evolutionary history or just might be
ultra might be trying to transmute it so
that it becomes we can we can maintain
and as you suggested we do we can
maintain what's useful in the tradition
and throw out everything that's
pathologic yes by the book we're
constantly discovering a lack of fit
between both our what we perceive in
ourselves as biological imperatives and
the cultural legacies of just what mommy
and daddy taught me was true right yes
we have now every reason to believe
might not be true and we're trying to
optimize our thoughts and institutions
and
relationships with one another for our
current circumstance and yet we have
this legacy effect of certain books and
certain ways of speaking have a
completely different status and they
have this status because they may in
fact it's imagined not be the products
of merely previous human minds but they
may be the products of omniscience and
that this is where the respect accorded
to religious tradition is totally unlike
the respect we would Accord to anything
else but you know mythology literature
past science past philosophy I mean
people can read Plato and Aristotle for
their entire lives with ever without
ever being fully captured by the kind of
dogmatism that that every religion
demands that you be captured by if
you're really going to be an adherent I
would say that's actually an archetypal
truth you know the idea that the
pathological tradition stands in the way
of update that's an archetypal truth I
mean one of the reasons why in in
creation myths one of the variants of a
creation myth is that the hero has to
slay a tyrannical giant in order to make
it make the world out of his pieces and
it's a metaphorical Restatement of the
idea that a tradition can become
hidebound and when it becomes hidebound
and too rigid that it interferes with
current adaptation but the problem isn't
and this is I think this is something we
really need to hash out the problem is
the problem that you're describing is
the problem of a priori structure now
some of that's textual but some of it
isn't textual some of it resides in us
as our psyche insofar salient the
problem I'm describing here is that we
have two categories of books in this
case we have those written by people
like ourselves just endlessly open for
criticism and conjecture and those
written by invisible omniscient and I
would assume that if these religious
systems weren't codified in books if
they were still just enacted or
dramatized you'd have the same objection
it's not the fact that they're in books
that's relevant no but it is the
dogmatism it's the fact right hand we
can't jettison the bad part okay it's
the dogmatism okay so to me that's the
same
the problem of structure now here here's
the here's the problem I think with the
way that your argument is laid out I'm
not saying it's wrong it seems to me
that this is a place where it needs to
be developed because I see that the
attempt that you make to derive the
world of value from the world of facts
as as justifiable given what it is that
you're attempting to do which in
principle is to make the world a better
place but there's a massive gap in there
it's like how do you do it because the
objection that you place on my my
reasoning let's say which is well the
problem with these texts is that there's
an infinite number of interpretations
and which of them can you how can you
determine which of those is canonically
correct is exactly and precisely the
same criticism that can be levied
against your attempt to extract the
world of value from the domain of facts
it's the same problem it's not an
infinite number of interpretations in
either case but I I allow throws enough
to infinite so that well it might be I
mean that's why the moral landscape for
me is a landscape of peaks and valleys
and so you know I'm totally open to the
possibility in fact certainty that there
are different ways for similar minds and
certainly different ways for different
minds to be constellated so that they
they have equivalent but irreconcilable
Peaks
on the bland scape so there's a lot of
well being over here and there's a lot
of well being over here and there's a
valley in between and so it's it's a
kind of moral relativism it's kind of
like oh this is this is great and this
is great but these are irreconcilable
right well I'd like to see that made
more concrete and I need to know how
that fits in with your conception
because one of the claims that you make
in the moral landscape is that the
distinction between the bad life and the
good life is normally it's like it's a
factual distinction yes it's universally
it's universally apprehensible and true
it's your I think it's your fundamental
axiomatic claim and I don't see how
that's commensurate with the position
that you just put forward was it so
here's the position and you can forget
about morality as a concept for this man
I think the mirtha the starting point is
deeper than morality the starting point
and this is all this is our starting
point all of us right now in
universe the starting point is we are
conscious right we have a we have a
circumstance that admits of qualitative
experience and again this is true
whatever however we understand
consciousness whatever is actually
happening we could be living in a
simulation this could be a dream you
could be a brain-in-a-vat
consciousness could just be the product
of neuro chemistry or we could have
eternal souls running on so how he is
somehow integrated with the brain
whatever is true something seems to be
happening and these Siemens can be
really really bad or really really good
we know yeah each one of us in our lives
have experienced this range of
possibility and yes there are caveats
here there are hard and painful
experiences that have a silver lining
right that gives you some other capacity
where you could say well you know that
really sucked
but I'm a better person for it right and
we can understand what it means to be a
better person for it
in terms again of this range of
experience which I you know I'm calling
to subsuming all of this the positive
end of this as well-being which is to
say that you know I'm a better person
for it because now you know having
endured that ordeal I am capable of much
greater compassion where I appreciate my
life more you know the cancer made me a
better person now that I've cured I
value each moment of life more than I
ever did all of these claims are
intelligible within a context of an
open-ended context of exploring this
space of possible experience so what I'm
saying is forget about morality forget
about right and wrong and good and evil
what is undeniable is that what we have
here is a navigation problem we have a
space of possible experience and again
it's not just a human problem this is a
problem for any possible conscious mind
we have a space of possible experience
in which we can navigate and we and
things can get excruciating and
pointlessly horrible where there are no
silver linings and we get this can this
can happen individually in some you know
episode of madness that never ends
if there really is a Christian hell to
go to well then it can it's gonna happen
to me after I die right given what I've
said on this stage if and so it matters
who's right obviously if I knew that a
an eternity of fiery torment awaited
somebody who didn't make the right
noises about one or one faith or another
well then it would only be rational to
make those right noises right so it's
it's my bet I'm placing a bet on certain
pictures of reality being wrong but the
reality is is we're navigating in this
space and morality and ethics are the
terms we use for how we think about our
behavior affecting one another's
experience so if you're in a moral
solitude if you're on a desert island or
if you're you know on a alone in the
universe morality is not the issue you
need to worry about but well-being still
is an ever-present issue it's possible
to suffer and it's possible to to
experience bliss and and something
perhaps something beyond that and we the
horizon in both directions is something
we will never fully expose explore very
likely we don't know how good things can
get and we don't know how bad they can
get but but that there's a spectrum here
is undeniable and I would say that that
my moral realism simply entails that we
acknowledge that it's possible not to
know what you're missing it's possible
to be living in a way where you are less
happy than you could be and not to know
why right and just not have the wisdom
to make the changes and that matters if
anything matters that matters and and it
matters to us individually and it
matters to us collectively and that
mattering is our is that subsumes
everything we can intelligently want in
this domain of value and that's and so
again it's a kind that the the cash
value of any value claim is in the the
actual or potential change in
consciousness for some conscious system
somewhere sometimes and that's that's my
claim and it's tonight can I try to get
but like you each to clarify something
so it sounds to me Sam like you are
hypothesizing that a rationalist
approach will always beat a traditional
metaphorical approach with respect to
the generation of well-being well not
always but a dozen that there's so many
obvious downsides to the traditional
sectarian dogmatic approach that we
should want to get out of the religion
business as fast as possible okay so
okay but as fast as possible but do you
mean that it has always been true that
we should always have gotten away from
it as fast as possible or do you mean
now we should get away from it as fast
as possible but there is a point
somewhere in the past where it might
have been true that actually the best
the most the richest path to wellbeing
might have been encoded metaphorical oh
yeah that's certainly possible and in
fact you might even say it was a likely
based on the fact that we have all of
these systems still around right so but
we still have the systems around in part
because our like we still we still think
in metaphor and we actually can't help
it because half of our brain is oriented
towards metaphor but what can I get you
to clarify something now yes okay so you
have argued and you've actually quite
surprised me by doing so you argued that
the dogmatism is a bug and not a feature
you argue no it's a began to feature
okay it's a bug and a feature good so
yeah but what what I thought I heard you
say was that the resistance to update
yes was a problem that effectively it
was an obstacle yes
so his lack of resistance dubbed it
right okay there's problems everywhere
man well it's there's a tension there is
a tension there's a tendency terrible
tension right well looking for by this
way look at it this way most new ideas
are stupid and dangerous but but most
some of them are as well I mean that's
some of them are vital right and so we
have we're screwed both ways it's like
well if we stay locked in our current
mode of apprehension all hell's gonna
break loose if we generate a whole bunch
of new solutions most of them are going
to be wrong and we're going to
died and so what we need to do is and
well it it's a Darwinian claim in some
sense is that yep despite the fact that
most new ideas are stupid and dangerous
a subset of them are so vital that if we
don't incorporate them we're all going
to perish that's the bloody existential
condition and so now and part of the
issue here and see and I think that this
is the problem is is that let's take
that the dogma idea okay so there's the
dogma incorporated in the books but I'm
gonna throw away that looks because the
dogma was there before the books and
then the question is where it was the
dogma and the answer was the dogma was
in the cultural practices but and in and
in the agreement that people made with
regards to those cultural practices but
it was also part and parcel of the
intrapsychic structure that enables us
to perceive the world as such now the
problem is and I think this is the
central place where we need to flesh out
these ideas is that you cannot view the
world without an a priori structure and
that a priori structure has a dogmatic
element and so you can't just say well
let's get rid of the dog Lent because
you can't perceive the world without a
struct it has an uninspected element
this is if you're talking about just
perceiving the world yes we have it we
have perceptual structure that allows
for us to perceive the world and we know
that there are failure states right so
we know we know for instance that we are
we are we've evolved to perceive in
visual space based on a literally
neurological expectation that light
sources will be from above
right as we know that we can produce
visual illusions based on gaming that
expectation right but that's not the
same thing as a a Dogma subscribe to
page 7 some subset of humanity that is
antithetical to another Dogma subscribed
to by another set of humanity that has
nothing to do with underlying biology
that something that this change is so
obvious well but it's changeable in real
time but based on just conversations
like this you know we could have you
know I get emails from people who can
point to this the paragraph where they
lost their faith right we're in reading
somebody in reading Richard Dawkins or
we're hearing a debate between between
me and some theologian where it's
a collision against rationality which is
so useful in every other context
suddenly proves its utility in this
context where they think well okay
clearly I know the Muslims are wrong
about the status of the Quran let me let
me take that that that spirit of
criticism in the internal space of my
own culture and what what moves well a
dogmatic attachment to Christianity has
to move by that same standard well and
that's and and it's possible to do that
and that's not a matter of getting into
the brain and changing your perceptual
apparatus that has well the distinction
between different levels of what would
you call it structure related processing
in the brain and the relationship to the
underlying biology isn't clear like and
it isn't clear when that's biological
and when is it when it isn't so you know
your your content your comments about
our a priori perceptual structures
notwithstanding there's no clear line
between what constitutes an instantiated
accurate biological perception and
something that shades more into a
cultural presupposition so it's a it's a
gray area now here let me ask you a
question so that this is one of the
things I've been thinking about so this
is this is designed to point out the
different I'm not making the claim that
the idea that we should ground values in
facts is wrong I'm not gonna make that
claim although I think it's way more
complicated than we've opened up so far
but I would say is I can I think
relatively easily demonstrate a
situation in which you cannot find the
value from the fact let's say you own an
antique it's valuable and you think I'm
gonna take this antique apart and I'm
gonna find out where the value is good
luck well it is it's not valuable in
that sense well wait a second wait a
second so we need to know so that's
right it's not valuable in that sense
because the value of the antique is a
social agreement about its position in a
hierarchy it has nothing to do with the
material substrate at the antique sure
yeah but but not you can't it's not
sure is that your are you've made the
claim already that you can derive values
from fats it's like then what are you
willing to know these are facts about
again so there are facts about the facts
exist in inter subjective space right so
if I if I tell you well this glass this
isn't just an ordinary glass I know it
looks just like that one but this is the
glass that Elton John drank from his
last concert Yeah right right Rob so you
know what do you want to pay me for it
right right yeah it could be that you
know you're just the biggest Elton John
fan ever and you it's worth quite a lot
to you now that is it's a kind of
evident it's not value intrinsic to the
glass but it is it is it is a where's
the value located well it's a measure in
in the change this provokes in your
experience right there's the idea I mean
we value ideas as much as anything else
and that's you know that's hence the the
mad work done by religion right anything
cuz it's not these aren't facts on the
ground these are ideas that rule
people's lives people spend their whole
life afraid of Hell okay it seems to me
that it's easier in some sense rather
than to relate the value of that I love
the Alton Jones glass example it's going
to use the Elvis Presley as here on
earth so I will tell if a it's like
wearing the guitar is the fact that it's
Elvis Presley's guitar
well it's nowhere in the guitar well
what is it in where is it then and the
answer is it's in the dominance
hierarchy of values that's been socially
constructed around the guitar it's
located in interpersonal space and that
that location so value is located in
interpersonal space and if you want to
say well that's also a fact it's like
okay but in fact and that's the beliefs
and desires and conscious states of all
the people involved okay well that's the
only place where it exists it's only for
the idea of Elvis's guitar can show okay
well I'm trying to figure out then you
see because what seems to me to be
happening at least in part is that the
we can stretch the the domain of what
constitutes a fact so that the domain of
fact starts to incorporate the domain of
values but we do that with some doing
some damage to the domain of fact so
don't don't say don't just say no it's
this is right cause they wore this
really complicated because you see part
of what the post modernists have done is
that they've pushed away the domain of
facts entirely and they'll say well the
only thing is is that the only thing
that actually exists is that this domain
of interest objective agreement and they
know yeah you and I are on the same page
with respect to post modernist right but
but but you have to give but you have to
give it you have to give the devil his
due as well they pointed out something
and what they pointed out is that it's
not so easy to localize the structure
that attributes to facts their value
it's not a simple thing now wait wait
wait yes you would surely agree that if
we had Elvis Presley's guitar that that
guitar would have a material impact on
people we could tell them this is Elvis
Presley's guitar some fraction of them
would disbelieve it somebody might be
able to establish it based on a picture
or something like that and the point is
it would have a value that would alter
the behavior of people with respect to
that object in a material way yes it
would alter the behavior value can also
manifest in physical space which part of
it the behavior detective we could
figure out what the value of this guitar
is based on some intersection sure we
need to take a behaviorist approach and
we could see how much work people were
willing to do - yes yes we can scan
their brains and see what it is well I
don't so sure we can do that well well
clearly the brain at home hypothetically
we can do it but practically we're not
so good because the amorite down it
generally speaking is junk well we can
table that well look it's that will be a
profoundly controversial statement in
MRI circles it's yeah fair enough I
don't think we need it we don't need it
but we know let's go with that a more
grain the brain as yet incompletely
understood it surely involved in the
valuing of this object right and so if I
see if I tell you that this is and again
we can take it out of inter subjective
space because it could you you could be
in a value solitude with respect to any
given object so it could just be you
could have a sentimental attachment to
your watch that's worth exactly
twenty-five dollars because that's what
you paid for it but this is the watch
that you know this is your first watch
or whatever it is and you wouldn't sell
it for any amount of money right that's
a measure of your
behavioral measure of how much you value
it and if I told you oh well you know
sorry I brought your watch and lost it
what the cascade of negative effects
that I see on your face is correlated
with something that's happening in your
head and the brain is involved right so
that the ology of that picture or
basically state is the value I can tell
is that there'd be a socio-cultural
agreement as to the value of whatever
this entity is and that would find its
mirror in the brain and that's that's a
non-controversial statement because all
socio-cultural phenomena that they're
experienced find the reflection in the
brain the fact that you can say that
that's reflected in the brain probably
it's continually run into with religion
is that there you have a domain of
so-called sacred values where people who
are otherwise rational cease to be
rational actors so the reason why the
Israel and the Israelis and the
Palestinians can't negotiate should as
though their problems could be solved by
a real estate transaction is because
they have irrational and irreconcilable
claims upon land and building do you
think the ready that I'd only think
they're any more your rational than the
claim that that Klaus is worth something
well no it's just no no it's like that
it's like that but that's not irrational
by your own definition you just said
that that was actually constituted of
fact well no it's a fact about people
right saying no there are this is okay
okay just be a little careful cuz it
gets confusing
yeah the there are we can make objective
claims about subjective experience right
it's not it's there are we use this word
objective and subjective in in different
ways we use it in histological ways and
ontological ways and wait give me just
one sec to make sure I'm on the same
okay what I can illustrate by way of
example if I say that you know that's
just your subjective opinion right I'm
saying I'm denigrating I'm saying that
you know this is an expression of your
bias this is this is just true for you
but it's not true out in the world right
that's one way I can use the the
subjective object of distinction and
that's an epistemological way like your
your your ruled by bias you're not
thinking straight you know I don't have
to
your opinion seriously that's subjective
I'm worried about objective facts but
people get confused they think that
objective facts only means the material
world and what's what's really in this
glass as a material object no we can be
a much more objective than that we can
we can make objective claims about the
subjective experience of people like
ourselves I can I can I can make an
infinite number of objective claims
about the experience this is the example
I always use but I just happen to love
it
what what was JFK thinking the moment he
got shot right that's it we don't know
so we'll never get the data right so the
the the truth or false nosov of what I'm
about to say can't be predicated on
actually getting access to the data
because because he's not around and his
brains not around to scan so but we you
and I both know an infinite number of
things he wasn't thinking about we can
make an objective claim about his
subjectivity I know he wasn't thinking
well I hope Jordan Peterson and sam
Harris work it out on stage that night
right and an infinite number of things
like that he was thinking something he
was experiencing something but we don't
know what it is that so I so what I'm
talking about this domain of value I'm
saying that it exists in the this
landscape of actual and possible
conscious experience for human beings
and and any other system like us that
can experience this range of suffering
and happiness well okay so and partly
what I'm trying to do is to actually
determine what that structure is like so
in our case it's certainly connected to
the evolved structure of our brain yeah
but it's all mental it's all mental by
everything else we do want to go way
deeper into to the idea then it's
connected with brain States because it's
yes it's definitely connected with brain
States the question is at least in part
how and what does that mean and I think
that the neuroscience has progressed far
enough so that we can do quite a good
job of this and so what I want to return
to one thing and maybe I'll outline a
little bit of this and when you talked
about the israeli-palestinian conflict
you said that that was irrational
and so look you know fair enough it we
people have been locked with their hands
around each other's necks there for
3,000 years but there's a problem there
and the problem is that people are
looking at the landscape from a
contextualized perspective right it's
not just a piece of land it's their
piece of land it's like your house or
maybe your favorite shirt it's like what
you say well I have a favorite shirt
it's like well there's nothing inherent
in this shirt that makes it your
favorite no it's a subjective judgment
it's like well then is that a fact
well yes it's a fact it's a fact about
subjective judgement it's okay well the
israeli claim on the land that the
palestinian claim on the land is a
subjective judgment that's a fact it's
like so how is it yet rather saying it
because it is the the true analogy here
the complete analogy is rather like
we're about to fight over elton john's
glass and elton john was never here
[Music]
so
so I'm not saying so it clearly still
matters to us in our misapprehension of
our situation we still really care and
these are these are objectively true
claims about the level of at which we
value things and then hence the impasse
but in a manner that's counterproductive
ly dismissive like you could say well
it's it's really not you look at that
specific claims it's really not it's
look you took you took the contextual
interpretation to its absolute extreme
you said well there's multiple reasons
why different people who occupy the same
piece of land are going to feel about it
in different ways sure okay and and most
of those reasons are amenable to some
kind of rational compromise their
studies on this and their studies done
by people who when you say disagree
right when you say the word rational in
that context you're using it as a black
box that contains the concept proper way
of thinking about it it's like it's not
so obvious tin most situations what the
rational approach is well I have an
obvious one here and and and that's that
whatever the Christians and the Muslims
and the Jews think they're getting from
their attachment to their dogmatic and
irreconcilable religious worldviews can
be gotten just as well by a deeper
understanding of the of our universal
and non culturally bound capacity for
ethical experience spiritual experience
community building and we can see what's
that red space what's that grounded in
we can touch that space without seeing
if it's almost like the status quo is
it's almost like you're content to live
in a world or you're at least you're
content not to judge too harshly a world
where fans of rival soccer teams or
baseball teams regularly kill one
another over their fandom right like
what if that were the status quo so I
spin this way for thousands of years
there must be a reason for it really
like sports I'm not trying to justify
the israeli-palestinian conflict no but
I'm saying that can lead to quick to
judge the sanctity of their of their
differences of opinion
but wait a minute Sam there you made a
claim like your claim was that if the
Christians and the Jews and the Muslims
would just stop their stupidity and
adopt this universal ethic then
everything would be okay it's like okay
what's the basis for the universal ethic
like that's such that there's a
non-profit at search of that the truth
ISM that's an interesting problem for
philosophers and for scientists that's
not actually where the rubber meets the
road for people living their lives well
I mean this is analogous to me sure we
have a difference between the by really
care about all of this and I'm not my
job as a as a philosophy as a moral
philosopher in that case is to make the
best case I can for these ideas but the
truth is it is analogous to when when
you get into a debate with a a Christian
fundamentalist in the States very often
this pert this person will pretend to
care about cosmology or evolution as
though it's the most important thing in
the world as though you can't get out of
bed in the morning and figure out how to
treat your friends and family well
unless you figure out what happened
before the Big Bang right no one really
lives their lives that way and yet we
have convinced ourselves that this is a
sensible way of talking about the
conflict between religion and I think
you I think you have arrived at the core
of your conflict right here and I
actually hear you both loud and clear
your point is that if the people faced
with the question were to you know start
with a fresh sheet of paper look at the
Middle East they could arrive at a
compromise that they as individuals
might find put them way ahead and is
more profitable than the situation that
they are continually finding themselves
yeah and that might be the case on the
other hand the reason that they don't is
that historically those who have have
been out competed by those who haven't
so the point is the universe and the
fact that it refuses to solve that
conflict is telling us that there is
some reason that people who take that
prospect seriously are not actually
correct
in some at least metaphorical way so in
other words what is it to have a
sentimental attachment to some piece of
territory somewhere that sounds
completely irrational on the other hand
that sentimental attachment may result
in you continuing for 500 or a thousand
or 2,000 years whereas if you
surrendered it because it was irrational
you might go extinct now should you care
that your lineage is gonna go extinct
maybe arguably not on the other hand
it's hard to imagine that what you're
saying is so thoroughly grounded that it
can justify causing people to alter
their perspective on value in such a way
that it might actually drive them
extinct it's not clearly secularism they
we're talking about the fringe here
we're talking about that when you're
talking about in this case the Israeli
settlers and the Palestinian terrorists
right like that is that is there we
should all breathe a sigh of relief that
that doesn't that that that kind of
passionate attachment to land doesn't
characterize most of humanity if you're
trying to defend your house so but that
but that's if it's in a kind of
different a contour dn't because I think
this is this is where you this is where
the the crux of it is well so if you
follow the idea that this is actually
some come that the seemingly sentimental
and irrational attachment to the piece
of land is some sort of meta rationality
which sounds like your perspective then
we are now confronted with the question
of alright if it is an evolved kind of
meta rationality that is being manifest
in stories that cause people to behave
in ways that Sam sees is clearly
irrational then we are stuck with the
naturalistic fallacy which is to say so
for those who don't know the
naturalistic fallacy says that just
because something is doesn't mean it
ought right the fact that selection
favors something doesn't make it good
when the Aztecs sacrifice their enemies
it is good for continuing Aztec nests
but it may not be good in some absolute
moral sense so here's the question for
you you're arguing for and I think an
evolutionarily very viable explanation
for religious belief and dogma but
aren't you stuck with the downside of it
where much of what is encoded in that
way may actually be abhorrent yet really
unconscious absolutely okay so what
doubt about it what do we do about well
this is this is exactly the sorting
algorithm yes what isn't trying to get
to it okay okay so this is actually why
I asked Sam this question it wasn't it
wasn't an attack it's like okay so look
people have these belief systems
Christian Muslim Jew will say for that
and you're saying abandon those let's
say - - and move towards this
transcendent rationality it's like okay
two problems it's not so easy to abandon
a belief system because you end up in
the moral relativist nihilist pit well
the problem one doesn't have to well
double tend to and so it's a little
problem this is not and don't have to
wait Sam that's a that's an empirical
claim that we would think we'd have to
find out whether that's true there's a
lot of evidence against that yeah well
there's plenty of evidence for it - but
it's beside the point to some degree
because that isn't that isn't something
that I want to quibble about there
perhaps there are trends
there are transitional paths and
sometimes people find a collapse of
their faith actually freeing it's
certainly the case that many of the
people who are happy about what you're
doing have found exactly that in what
you've been saying and more power to you
and so on I'm not willing to dispute
that but what you said was okay here's
these belief systems that are ancient
and complex and we can step outside of
the men there's this transcendent
rationality that we could all aspire to
that would solve the problems it's like
okay what is it well what is it examine
Imam to value all of the variables that
conspire to make the one life we know we
have can't value all those variables
well no we can we were doing it right we
do it every day and how we organize
ourselves because I apply an a priori
framework to the variables to reduce
them to a tiny subset that we can manage
and it's the nature of that a priori
framework that we haven't been able to
have a discussion about we have an API a
framework that narrows our perception to
almost nothing it's built into us it's
partly socially constructed it has a
deep neurological
straight and we actually understand how
it emerges to a large degree and the
thing is is that but I don't think I
don't think that's actually our
difference so this the a priori
framework operates in many different
spaces which again we can't necessarily
analyze but it makes it no less true so
if you if you put your hand on a hot
stove you will immediately feel a good a
very good reason in fact an unarguably
good reason to remove it right and
that's it doesn't require moral
philosophy to get you there you don't
need it you don't need to inspect your a
priori framework you just have to feel
holy this is the worst thing I've
ever felt right and there's so many
moments like that in life that we dimly
under that we understand rescue your
child from a fire well exactly then you
have you have some other goal right
cause you to brave that that suffering
right yes and but again trying to rescue
your child from a fire is pretty close
to as the hot stove in not needing to be
analyzed right the imperative to rescue
your it becomes harder when you have to
rescue someone else's child from the
fire and your ch and you're worried
about orphan in your child who's
standing next to you on the sidewalk
right then we get into the domain of
moral philosophy and then you can say
well you know what do what how much do
each of us owe the children of other
people right
how much should I've risked my life and
risk orphan in my child to rescue your
child that's when things get interesting
in a philosophy seminar and that's where
people begin to hesitate people begin to
we are biased toward protecting
ourselves protecting our kin protecting
our friends and only then do we begin to
extend the circle and again moral but it
is not a mystery where we want to go
here we want to extend the circle more
and more and build institutions and
societies that that that implement our
best selves at our best moments more and
more makes it more effortless to be good
take your example seriously if you're
said yeah alright so you are built to be
more likely to rescue your own child
than someone else's child from a fire we
in society might like
or the minimum number of children to die
in fires as possible which gets you to
sidelines that consideration in favor of
is there a child who's faced with a fire
who on why might rescue religions do
exactly this restructuring of values
because they say something like actually
your goodness in risking your own life
to save that other child from the fire
is observed and it is it is calculated
and you will be rewarded for it in some
way that if that's one possible benefit
of some religions right good and ok so
you put that on the balance but I have a
lot to put on the other side of the
ground do I know you know however and we
list all right but that's what I'm
trying to point out to Jordan here which
he actually acknowledges which is that
he's got a big stack of good things that
come from this heuristic but he's also
acknowledged actually get this this is
our core of disagreement here which is
it however you want to however the
balance is going to swing the difference
between us here is that I think we read
the utility of relevant of anything but
in this case religious thinking as
evidence of you you read it as evidence
of something perhaps in it literally
true inevitability ok so I say and I
view that as a kind of version of either
the genetic or naturalistic fallacy that
it's just done whether whether that's
it's useful now here for us it doesn't
doesn't argue that it's the best way of
getting those good things I mean that my
argument here is that religion gives
people bad reasons to be good we're good
reasons are available ok so and that's a
problem right that because good read
good reason scale better than bad
reasons and I think we can under even if
you take the case where religion is
clearly useful in a life saving utterly
benign way in in virtually all of those
cases I think I can I can get you there
by some other way without the the
downside or if not that's just one of
those cases where
yes the fiction was more useful how many
possible distinguish a religious system
from an a priori perceptual structure
well if you can convert to it or away
from it in a single conversation I would
say if it doesn't go very deep well
you're only I would say that for much of
that you're only converting at a very
superficial level
well no converting at the level of
conscious apprehension and most of your
cognition is done through unconscious
process all this so it's it's just a
fact about us that most of people's
religious attachment is born of having
it drummed into them by their parents
right if I made it but the truth no
their parents and their parents parents
and their parents yes exactly but if we
did the same thing with Batman and
spider-man it would have the same effect
right like if you relentlessly told
children right I mean I've got you know
two little girls who are you know
dressed up like that girl right now they
love that girl there's nothing I don't
have to do anything to make them more
enthusiastic about superheroes apart
from just showing them the pictures of
superheroes right if I told them in
addition to how look how fun this is to
dress up like Batgirl in addition you're
you're gonna burn in hell for eternity
if you lose your emotional attachment to
Batgirl even for a minute right well
then it's gonna be bad girl for the rest
of their lives especially if the entire
culture is is doing likewise and I you
know again this is well already a bad
tool is better than no tool at all and
if that girl is the closest
approximation to a divine figure that
you can conjure up it beats the hell out
of none at all and if Batgirl didn't
partake of certain archetypal structures
no one would give a damn about Batgirl
spider-man and Batman I'm gonna spare
you will play a role in the car because
look the whole vomit accidental it's not
accidental that superheroes stories have
a structure well and to say that well
Batman and spider-man are obvious
fictions and we could use them as not a
jury you taking the wrong end you're
taking the wrong into this I'm not I'm
not minimizing the power of stories
right I'm saying we can understand their
power
without recourse to believing things we
shouldn't believe now in the 21st
century I still need an answer to the
question about what it is that's this
transcendent transcendental rational
structure without an a priori an a
priori don't want because I don't see it
was I again we touched on this a little
bit last night in that I freely admitted
that in every domain of human inquiry no
matter how the most hard-headed
so mathematics logic physics at some
point we have to pull ourselves up by
our bootstraps at some point we make a
move that is not self justifying and is
not justified by any other move that's
more rudimentary right that's a
statement of faith that would be you
know an ethic that's a callow use of
this term faith is not the same precise
definition of a neck see Mike's my faith
my faith that two plus two makes four
that's not faith what Noah didn't know
is my intuition that this is a valid and
replicable and generalizable principle
right you know that's either your
statement that that's a useful claim is
a statement of faith but neither of
those two were statements of faith no it
was their statements about tuition
these are intuitions these are because
and their intuitions that can run afoul
of other discoveries and other
intuitions as you know which only if
mathematical facts are intuitions then
what are we doing
let's take a table so we've arrived we
have to decide a super-important though
okay okay we don't losers okay this is
so we for what two thousand years people
have been studying geometry and had a
very well worked out set of mathematical
intuitions with respect to Euclidean
space you know flat geometry and then
some brilliant guy you know riemann
might have been the first said well
actually you can curved space you know i
can bend this triangle and all of a
sudden that has more than 180 degrees
right
that's an intuition that people tuned up
pretty quickly but all of humanity was
blind to it for the longest time right
these are at what I mean by intuition is
it's the thing you're using to
understand something that you you are
not in a position to analyze I am now
that's but that's not faith of the sort
which is listen I know the Bible was
dictated by the creator of the universe
I know Jesus was his son I know he rose
from the dead I know he'll be coming
back and a thousand other propositional
claims it's a statement it's a highly
valuable if it's a statement of faith
and it's in the value domain how is it
derived from fact
okay so I've we've arrived at the point
where we have to decide whether to go to
QA or to continue the discussion while
you all are thinking about that I would
like to level a challenge to each of you
and then I will pull the audience and
see what they think about Q&A okay okay
so Jordan is arguing to you that you
cannot ground the values that would
undergird the modality of increasing
well-being in anything factual and you
are arguing in response that not without
an intermediary so let me just argue and
hold on a second
not without an intermediary struck what
I've heard you argue is something that I
agree with which is that you can ground
many things in a nearly objective
observation of the universe but it
doesn't say anything about the value
part of the equation and in fact I think
having thought about the question from
an evolutionary point of view that in
order to do what you're talking about to
increase well-being you are going to
have to accept that that is going to
leave you with an arbitrary grounding
there is no absolute grounding for it
you're gonna have to just simply accept
that it's going to make you arbitrary
that you are in fact going to have to do
no inconsistent things like decide to
honor the love of a mother for her child
and dishonor the love of country that
causes one population to to gasps
another population that's inconsistent
and no don't do embrace that in kind of
inconsistency I mean it's just a
different that's it I don't think that
we even have the grounding problem I
think it's a pseudo problem I think we
but you just say we have to put stuff in
somewhere
we have a navigate the way it's grounded
is the acknowledgement that what we have
is it's analogous to what people do with
the notion of meaning in life like
what's the meaning of life how do you
find meaning in life but what's the
purpose of life these are bad questions
these are questions that but when you
pose them they seem to demand they
suggest a space in which an answer must
be put but it's it's just
but you put an answer they help you sell
the people should work towards the good
yes there's a different there's a
different way of framing it which is
what we have here is an opportunity it's
not a met it's not a matter of meaning
it's not a matter of purpose and it's
not a matter of grounding it's a matter
of we are in a circumstance where that
where we have consciousness and its
contents in every moment and all of this
is it that the light the lights are on
and they're on for reasons that we dimly
understand right these are their reasons
that are biological in our case but
perhaps at bottom they're just based on
information processing and that they're
platform-independent and then we would
build machines for whom the life the
light is actually on or not right this
is it remains to be seen whether we
could actually build in our computers
conscious minds that can thrive or
suffer right and that the difference
matters but we're in the circumstance
where we are trying to understand how
conscious consciousness and its States
arises but one thing that is undeniable
is that the lights are on and being on
they reveal a spectrum of experience
that which has one end that we the the
worse it gets the more compelling it is
to move away from it now meaning that's
meaning yes okay so the soap and then
and all of our meaning talk and value
talk relates to navigating in this space
so there's well there's one end of it
where things get needlessly horrible
without a silver lining
and there's another end where it gets
better and better and nonzero-sum and
all boats are rising with the same
tied and the Israelis and the
Palestinians the landscape they evil and
good yeah okay what do you do that's why
so these are compelling ways to talk
about this space of navigation what do
you do when you accept your space of
navigation and there's a conflict
between wellbeing for the living
population of Earth roses well-being
over the maximum populations that could
possibly live into the future when they
have a big conflict between how much
well-being we are gonna feel now versus
how much well-being future human beings
will get to feel yeah well that those
are legitimate ethical problems which
but we I think we often live in the
space where we know there's a right
answer that we are too selfish to
fulfill or too short-sighted to fulfill
like so I know there are things I do
every day that not only will other
people as yet unborn wish I hadn't done
I might wake up tomorrow wishing I
hadn't done those things right so like
I'm I I'm a bad friend to my future self
in some respect to say nothing of the
rest of humanity so we can be so we can
have failures of we could have weakness
of will we can have failures that we can
just be wrong about certain things but
it's nowhere written that is easy to be
a good person right in that case it's
not even clear what good means well no I
know it is clubs really knows oh the
answer it might be hard to be motivated
by that knowledge and that because we're
not a unity right I mean part of a part
of what wisdom is morally is an ability
to be able to live integrated enough
with your own you know better self we
have the advice you would give to a
friend just falls right out of your work
as well it's like well live is uh but
basically treat yourself the way you
would treat I think this is your line so
you know someone new you're you're
responsible for or there's some of you a
friend of yours right if you can if you
can do that you're already ahead of who
most people are most of the time but
there's no there's no reason to say that
because it's difficult or because
sometimes we're looking through a glass
darkly and can't figure out what the
answer is the answer doesn't exist or
there is no right one
okay now let me try with you you yeah so
Jordan you have argued for an evolved
framework of religious belief in which
there are elements that are morally
defensible that will be carried through
time there are elements that are morally
reprehensible that will be carried
through time by virtue of the fact that
they are effective and you have argued
that these things because they have
withstood the test of time have some
kind of value which is not necessarily
something that we should honor but some
large fraction that it must be but that
would seem to suggest that the degree to
which these belief structures has value
is contingent on the degree to which the
environment in which we attempt to
deploy these structures matches the
environment in which they evolve
absolutely now I would argue that no
population of humans has lived farther
from its ancestral environment than we
do
yeah that's a fallacy you think so yes
well it isn't it isn't and look I think
that's an absolutely valid point okay so
much so this gets esoteric relatively
rapidly but the question is let's say at
the highest levels of adaptation were
adapted to the things that lasts the
longest periods of time okay those are
the most permanent things now the
question is what are those most
permanent things and you know one answer
would be the fundamental material
substrate of the world and all right
that's true I'm gonna leave that be like
we're evolved to deal with gravity okay
but there are other elements that are
higher order abstractions in some sense
that are also apparently hyper real so
for example there's there's a problem
that we have a bifurcated brain the
question is well why do we have a
bifurcated brain and the answer seemed
and not just us animals to master seems
to be well there's two necessary ways of
looking at the world and they have to be
in conflict to some degree in order to
work properly the right hemisphere mode
and the
left hemisphere mode the right
hemisphere mode is a lot more
metaphorical than the left hemisphere
mode the right hemisphere is the
hemisphere that seems to deal with
exceptions to the rule and it seems to
deal with exceptions to the rule by met
by treating them by aggregating and then
trying to recognize patterns that unite
them as a corrective to the totalitarian
system in some sense that the left
hemisphere imposes you could say that
the right and the left are adapted for
something like explored territory for
the left and unexplored territory for
the right i've characterized that as
order versus chaos and i said i think
the religious landscape is good versus
evil to Sam's point that we should
strive for a good life on a landscape of
chaos first disorder and I think that
landscape is permanent now I know we've
moved from our African ancestral
homeland but these this underlying
abstraction this underlying on this
underlying reality is so profound that
it it maintains its validity across all
sets of potential environmental
transformations well okay okay can I
just jump in here because here's why
just a sea is on one piece you you put
and play there here's why good and evil
can't be permanent in the in the usual
sense certainly not in the Christian or
judeo-christian sense one is that the
judeo-christian notion of good and evil
doesn't even map on to eastern you made
a good evil versus immoral lands Oh
quite excited but it's also in an
Eastern context and a Buddhist or Hindu
context the evil isn't really evil is
just ignorance now you might dispute
that you might say well that's not
really that they haven't met a
sufficiently evil person to if they
could think that but the reality is
they're billions of people who have a
different rubric under which a make that
case but listen let me add another
another case you're just going to ask
them okay I need you guys maybe you guys
want this conversation to continue or do
you want Q&A to begin I don't know which
one you're fearing or
we give them okay he give them a
partisan effort guru is the group that
wants this conversation to continue
all right well now the group that would
prefer Q&A what's the former there what
was disturbing is that many of the same
people were clapping that proves what
I'm saying about the two hemispheres
that are a metaphor so so look I mean it
seems to me and again correct me if I'm
wrong is that you made an absolute moral
claim in the moral landscape and that's
what groans here take the Fievel piece
because it'll be interesting if it's not
totally on point okay the reason why
evil is susceptible to total deflation
is if you agree with me evil is a
category of human misbehavior human
intention that we don't understand
significantly at the level of the brain
but if we did understand it totally at
the level of the brain then every evil
person we had in the dock at trial would
be just like Charles Whitman with his
brain tumor after he shot up everyone at
the University of Texas right so like
he's at he's the prototypical
evil mass murderer but he's complaining
about that this change that overcame his
personality and he thinks it would be
good because a good idea that after the
cops kill me you autopsy my brain
because I don't know why I'm doing any
of this right and lo and behold he had a
glioblastoma but president hasn't
McDonough and all of a sudden it made
sense of his behavior in a way that a
full understanding of psychopathy or
every other variant of human evil would
make sense of it in a way that would be
deflationary ethically and then and then
you would look at so then you look at
someone like Saddam Hussein or the the
the worst evil person you could imagine
and you would say well he's actually
unlucky you know there but for the grace
of biology go I because if I had that
brain if I had those genes if I had
those influences that gave me those
synapses I would be just like him now if
you think there's some other element
that gives us free will and and now then
you and I are disagreeing then that's a
factual claim that's at variance with
mine
but but if we are just on some level now
a malfunctioning biological systems when
we're being evil then a complete
understanding of evil would cancel that
category can you have a claim define
evil so we know what you're talking
about
well just let me take take just the
worst people who have statistically
victimized the most people and those are
the evils people we can name so it's a
so when you say so I think this is
actually really important so I think
actual evil of that kind is pretty darn
rare and there's a lot of badness that
yes oh yeah well the most troubling
thing are all the good people doing evil
because they're ruled by bad ideas but
that I think is more consequential than
we introduce we introduced a whole set
of other things here in the last little
round but a free will and evil but but
but just I just want to make it clear
why I went there so you were saying this
is this is this is I forget that word
you used inevitable or ineluctable or
its permanent location is that this
category is permanent and I'm saying
diet that I don't think ok but evil in
that sense it's a permanent category for
it awaits more information and insight
ok we're going to distinguish for a
minute good versus evil and good versus
bad just for the sake of conceptual
clarity in the moral landscape you make
a fundamental axiomatic claim looks like
a moral claim may be its claim a fact
and the claim is there are bad lives and
good lives sure and the claim you make
is that that's universally true
well it's is true for the the requisite
mine who knows 10 Dewey's okay doesn't
matter ok but evil so yes unless I'm not
telling you that you should purge the
word evil from your your vocabulary I
use the word all the time and I think
it's useful it's a motivating word I'm
just saying that it's ok there we can
understand this continuum of good and
bad or positive and negative in ways
that don't use the juice certainly don't
use the judeo-christian framework for
valuing these things because if you if
you take the Buddhist framework and map
it on to this this continuum you don't
get good and evil you get essentially
wisdom and
evil is ignorance of all the well being
you would you and others would
experience if you behaved another way
right that's the Buddhist game and and
or even well then Hinduism Euler yeah
they get this connects to you or your
that your love of stories you take the
the the Hindu texts the Ramayana which
is just a found days you know it's doing
the work that the Bible is doing for
Jews and Christians in that the worst
guy in the Ramayana where the 10 headed
demon Ravana the prototypically evil
person is at bottom really not a bad guy
he's a great sage who was just you know
in a bad mood essentially he was he was
obscured by ignorance and so it is in
the Buddhists can and the Buddhists me
the Buddha meets a serial killer who you
know is wearing a garland of human
fingers around his neck named uncool
uncool Amala but he was just one
conversation away from being fully
enlightened writing me he was like this
is is a different picture of possibility
I'm not saying one is right or wrong
let's be agnostic about that I'm just
I'm challenging your claim that there's
something so prescient and useful and
durable about the judeo-christian I was
I wasn't making what we're stuck with it
for all time he's making that claim I
was making the claim that in the moral
landscape you laid out a distinction
between the bad life and the good life
forget about Rutan evil the bad life of
the good life hell in heaven the bad
life in the good life and that that
distinction was not only factual but
universal and so it's you know that
actually have had a right mind so that
we could imagine a mind I mean this is
an example I think I give the right mind
you know but we could we could create
circumstances that seem perverse to us
that we would recoil from you could you
could create a a universe of perfectly
matched sadists and masochists saying
right so you have the people who are
real say this who in our world would be
terrible actors but in their world
they're surrounded by people who want to
be mistreated now again if you're a real
sadist you never mistreat a masochist
when he asked alone okay well
BRABUS I'm not
sorry I'm not sure the human categories
even exist who live exist but in some we
undoubtedly we could create something
like an artificial intelligence that
could be could be paired this way and
that would be weird but on mine in my
framework it is a conceivable space of
equivalent well-being and if it's not
matched at all to our space rights but
it's if if in fact we could inspect the
conscious minds of all parties
participating in that it is not
obviously absurd but in my view to say
that they are just as happy as we are in
his conversation in fact some moments in
this conversation I would say that they
might be the happier yards feel good
it's been good so let me let me ask you
a question here about well-being because
this is something I've wanted to ask you
about but we never seem to get to is so
you think that we should maximize
well-being and that's part of your
proposition which which I don't entirely
disagree with by the way that we should
ground our value structures in facts but
but but there's a black box problem
there like I think the black box problem
about the a priori structure that we use
to extract the facts of the world out
and the black box problem is if we could
measure well-being it's like yeah that's
a big problem Sam like we have measures
of well-being and they're terrible
yes they are if you no no I I'm agreeing
I don't I don't think it's but it's not
a problem for my thesis is it we don't
have measures for anything we care about
we yeah but I mean if your if your
thesis is that if we had the measures of
well-being that were appropriate we
could use them in a positive way and the
responses but we don't have those
measures it's like well okay well then
what do we do oh no no what we have only
have measures and if this conversation
is a measure I don't like that that's a
measure right you step on my toe and I
say ow that's a measure don't do that if
that's not a measure of your well-being
it might be a measure of your treat your
auto system its am it as a measure of
but I mean that I measure non-points but
I shouldn't expect I mean this
technically if you look at the
well-being measures that we have
yeah they degenerated to measures of
neuro
we don't we don't but we don't have
measures of certainty of belief of
compassion of joy of any any of these
conscious states we have we have neural
correlates of some of them but we don't
have okay there's no well then how to
helmet I could also hold all rights
about them to orient ourselves in the
world then because we're doing that
we're doing this all the time yours if
you've got an instantaneous measure
though you've got an instantaneous
measure of well-being we can all check
with ourselves see how we feel but it's
possible to be wrong about that right
always but it degrades as you get away
from the individual's ability to check
internally the internal the internal
thing isn't reliable its liable or happy
when you're doing things well sure and
with your sake a drug that would make
you feel very good and would cause you
to take apart your own life because it
would mean like okay right you would it
would destroy the the motivational
structure that gets you to do stumps
stuff of value that that you're right so
we can't use emotion well right moment
emotion as an indicator right well the
in taneous is not good but you have a
parallel problem it looks to me like the
exact mirror image which is that you've
got an integrative long-term measure of
well-being instantiated in an
evolutionary belief system but it's
coming apart because we are living in
circumstances that are less well
mirrored that the President does not
mirror the past and therefore these
games which you you believe our timeless
are degrading rapidly that's part of
there that's exactly right okay so what
Sam is arguing is that the tools to
pivot in order to improve our way of
interacting those are not the tools of
long-standing tradition those are the
tools of rational engagement respect for
that process is part of the
long-standing tradition yes that's true
yeah but that's a big truth Mike that's
a major-league truth I agree and in fact
I would say the fundamental tradition
the most fundamental tradition of the
west says that respect for the process
that updates moral judgment is the
highest of all possible values and
that's also built into the tradition
strangely enough I agree it's built into
the tradition but I would argue that it
is
very likely to be compartmentalized in
other words I was a little bit struck
when you said that what did you say
about scaling you said that that a good
reason scale and bad reasons don't isn't
that the opposite of the truth calling
if you're calling these was stories that
give prescriptions for how to behave bad
ideas the point is those stories
propagate very easily so where as so if
we want to talk about the gun and
whether it is loaded the idea that the
gun is definitely loaded that scales
really easily right you can pass that
along in one sentence and the classic
book the common way of it again I'm
wrong about a loaded gun also scale
right so no no other no well this you
want to talk to people about very small
possibilities of very dire things
happening they trip over it it's hard
thing to get it's almost impossible for
Golden together so the point is the one
thing does scale the story that says
yeah every gun is loaded it's a false
story but that one definitely scales
yeah the statistical reality of guns and
the fact that they may indeed be
unloaded but you don't want to play
around with the remote possibility that
one day you'll get it wrong right that
doesn't scale because it requires you to
have experience with stuff that is not
common right so the two things there one
if you bring up a an ancillary of a very
important point which is that moral
progress here is often the result of
moving from our story driven protagonist
driven intuitions to something far more
quantified right so I mean it's a
there's a classic you know moral study
done by Paul slovic oh I'm sure you are
aware of where you know you tell people
about one needy little girl in Africa
and you give her a name and and and show
her picture and what you elicit is the
maximum altruistic compassionate
response from subjects you go to another
group of subjects you tell them about
the same little girl give her the same
name but also tell them about her needy
little brother
who has the same need and their response
diminishes right it's just the addition
of a single person diminishes the
response and this is just this is a
moral fallacy that we're all living out
every day because you care about this
one little girl you should care at least
as much about the fate of her and her
brother and when you as status --tx no
no you shouldn't because those are no
uses a non-answer man you'll exhaust
yourself in the attempt no because we
need what do you want but this is but
here here why this is what this this is
what this software flog gets us it gets
us people who will watch for hours a day
with with with effortless and and you
know tear-stained compassion the the the
Sokka of the little girl who fell down
the well but who will blithely turn the
channel when they're hearing about a
genocide that is raging and hundreds of
thousands have already died this is
something we have to let if you have to
go for this you don't know I'm not
talking about person no but your
misunder you're misunderstanding me to
create effect here that if I'm not
saying that you should personally be
overwhelmed by the death toll every day
you I'm not saying that it's functional
for you and I to each personally get up
each morning and just drink deep of the
full horror of all the bad luck for the
spread no maybe it is but maybe we can't
help but as societies we need a well
you're talking about how we aport but
how we spend our money how we get a
portion foreign aid the kinds of wars we
fight or don't fight you know kind of
interpret well then we have to correct
for what is in fact a more illusion
which is we know that if we tell one
little we at least we tell one
compelling story about a little girl
right we could go to war over that right
whereas we won't be motivated by a
genocide that's the kind of thing that
moves whole societies now and if it's if
you add to it the bogus religious
sanctities if you if you if we burned a
Quran on this stage tonight the rest of
our yes the rest of our lives would be
spent in hiding right because of how
motivated people would be
to address that pseudo problem right
that's the world we're living in and
we're and civilization insofar as we
have a purchase on it is a matter of
correcting for those errors and religion
in for the most part not across the
board but for the most part is standing
in the way of those course corrections
well okay there is a tremendous amount
to an unpack in that I mean and and like
in some sense a surprising amount it's
like well we have were wired to feel
intense empathy for individuals who are
close to us and we can be told stories
in a manner that that makes that system
manifest itself and everyone and their
dog thinks that that's a wonderful thing
and we call that empathy right and
empathy has a narrow domain of utility
as it turns out because how I mean maybe
if you were all who you should be
you'd be weeping constantly for the
catastrophic fate of sentient beings on
the earth but you can't handle it you
know what I mean it's that you can
barely handle your own suffering and
maybe you can handle a bit of the
suffering of your family and more power
to you if you could rectify that and if
you were better human beings maybe you
could expand that outwards but the fact
that our empathy doesn't scale up to the
level of genocide with the same
intensity that we treat instances of
individual suffering isn't an indication
that we're irrational it's just an
indication that were limited this is not
true I think this is an indication of
exactly the problem of our evolved
structures not matching the present
because the point is that they don't
match because we take care of our
families no but they don't match because
if you encountered the starving girl
that's some sort of a it's a crude
measure of suffering in your local
environment were you in the past now
that you can encounter this girl on the
television it's not clear what it should
mean to you right right you can't
calibrate how many zarach to get right
and so that so the point is your
indifference to a genocide which is an
abstraction right is altered should you
see pictures of the bodies for example
you shouldn't actually feel differently
about the genocide in the abstract case
versus the the case that you're looking
at the bodies and the fact that we have
access to photo realistic representation
chef Bretting so what is worse that this
is why is actually irrational because I
can show you the case where
you care at level 10 about the little
girl named Lila and you care at level 8
about a little girl named Lila and her
brother named John T right and you care
at level 4 if I've added a few more kids
but the little girl named Lila who you
was ostensibly care about is there in
each one of these right so ya know but
like you have on the vocation of the
sufferer you have ten dollars to give
away every month to help start
struggling humanity and you tell me
you'll give ten to Lila this month and I
said and and then I catch you in another
moment and I say well you know it's Lila
and her brother so it's like if you only
can give ten I understand but you know
it's the problem is actually worse than
I suspected and you say well that
actually all of them is gonna give a
right you it's it's not coherent with
your how much you cared about Lila in
the first place we do know we do know
quite well that the heuristics that we
use to orient ourselves in the world can
be placed into frameworks where they
produce contradictory outcomes but that
doesn't mean that the heuristics
themselves are deeply flawed it's that
it's a problem with the work of people
like Kahneman and Tversky is they really
value dramatic sort of them we need to
correct for them because they're they're
producing their reliable result that we
we recognize you can put them in a
situation where they produce a
counterproductive response but that
doesn't mean that generally speaking in
most situations they don't produce a
useful outcome because the question is
why in the hell would have they evolved
if they didn't produce yes welcome taste
of the Thai evolved to live with a
hundred and fifty people with whom we're
related and to be terrified of the
people in the next Valley
who may want to kill and eat us yes I
mean that's our ancient circumstance
which doesn't map on to a common
humanity of seven billion people trying
to figure out how to get to Mars without
killing each other well it it does map
on to it sometimes unfortunately because
there are many times when we still face
the same threats without hence look with
map songs is the hierarchy we can find
the claw down you wouldn't be concerned
about that fundamentalist terror of
Islam if you weren't driven by those
essentially tribal considerations no
it's not suggests it's not wrong it
doesn't require if my a mere
identification with you
it can ground not wanting to be murdered
by people who are identified with a
subset of humanity right like I don't
need to be part of a smaller tribe to
care that people will murder me over
burning a Quran right it's it's just
it's clearly counterproductive that we
live in a society where some objects are
held with such totemic attachment for
irrational reasons by many many millions
of people where you know you should be
sympathetic with this our free speech is
actually cancelled on this point right
yeah literally can't produce cartoons I
are scholarly were not about the cartoon
phrase we don't show the card we have no
argument whatsoever
so each meanness about the lack of
utility of duty you don't have to be
identified as a bullet as a Christian or
a Jew to push back against that you just
have to be a human being that sees the
dysfunction of a smaller I have kind of
provincialism well the thing that I'm
struggling with is that I still can't
understand in what your ethos is is is
grounded because you you claim like a
transcendental rationalism but you won't
identify the structures that produce it
it's a black box and when I try to push
you on the absolute nature of your
ethical claim which is that the bad life
is worse than the good life and that we
should in fact universally work towards
the good life it doesn't seem to me that
you'll accept the proposition that
that's a universal claim if no it is it
is you well I should as irrelevant here
it's just the fact that there is the
possibility of of moving in this space
if you move in the wrong direction
if you move far enough you'll like it
less and less
why is she relevant give given the given
the minds you have all right well I
thought it said what if you had to
accept moving in the wrong direction and
experiencing less and less well-being in
order to get to a better place in well
and maybe even just to survive suppose
the suppose a population has to endure a
generation and a half of misery in order
to persist ethically that's a perfectly
intelligible circumstance that people
have had to face and it's
in my on my moral landscape it's
analogous to when we were we might be
one local maximum or city or the some
high point but we're moving in a down a
slope to get to yet some higher place
right so certain things allness some
things may only be possible if we made
some painful and net unpleasant
sacrifice yes and so that but that's
that can be rationally apprehended there
can be an argument for that it could be
a wheel you know we all have to go on a
diet otherwise we're gonna you know
we're gonna die of this problem right we
all have to stop eating whatever it is
wheat right it's a hard sacrifice for
people have to stop it as you know if
that were just true well then there'd be
an argument for it there'd be evidence
that would convince us we would stop we
would feel the pain and we would we
would get whatever benefit we that was
on the other side of that sacrifice but
again you don't have to it's the utility
I get to come bring it back to stories
which is as you know not my emphasis but
it is yours the the utility of stories
is not something I'm arguing against I
mean there's no question that certain
stories are incredibly compelling and in
our conversation with one another the
moment you begin to frame something in
terms of a story people become much more
interested right I like it if if if 90%
of what we said together tonight were
frayed each each point we were making as
a matter of philosophy or soar or
science were framed in well actually you
know yesterday I was walking down the
street and I met this guy who's a
terrifying looking guy and all of a
sudden people become much more
interested right and that's not an
accident and that says something deep
about us that we could understand at in
evolutionary terms and we might in fact
want to creatively leverage to be better
people
yes have better conversations definitely
yes so wait so that's what I think
there's nothing there's nothing that I
say in opposition to religious dogmatism
and religious sectarianism that
discounts that reality and that's a
psychological reality is a cultural
reality and I'm not against making the
most of it
my
basic claim however is that we never
need to believe that one of our books
may not have a human origin in order to
do that effectively you can you can be
just as compelled by the example of
somebody like Jesus or some more modern
person who strikes he was a moral hero
and a BA and deeply wise without
believing anything on insufficient
evidence and if and and as I saluted to
purely fictional stories about
superheroes can have immense effect on
us and that's something we could
understand and also leverage but again
that takes us out of the religion
business and that's that's all I've been
arguing for so do you really believe
that that the belief in the supernatural
aspect of these stories never alters the
calculus of what people should do that
the divine nature of a story of AB Jesus
doesn't motivate people to do something
that they might not have the courage to
do otherwise the belief that they might
end up in heaven because their good work
is going to be observed it doesn't alter
their behavior well yeah I know it
alters their behavior but it but rather
often for the bad
well I mean this is why this is what
worries me about and hey I think there's
something there's a profound net
negative that we are paying paying the
price for every day by believing in
paradise right a belief a belief that
this life it probably doesn't matter
very much at all because we get what we
really want after we die is forget about
the evidentiary basis for that belief it
it is it's ruinous for prioritizing what
we should be prioritizing in this life
and it with that by the way yeah ok well
that's interesting
so let me ask you this I hear from you
what might be a kind of confirmation
bias where I hear that you know we've
got a mixed bag
you've got supernatural claims these
supernatural claims we all agree have
effects on the way people actually
behave and you're quite focused on the
negative and you tend to discount the
positive which might be an artifact of
the fact that we're talking about the
present and therefore maybe something
that's not well matched to these stories
or it might be from the idea that you
have the sense that there is actually a
bias that these belief structures do and
have always produced more harm than good
and also my sense that the positive can
be had without those structures so the
if you're talking about the the
contemplative experience like is it
possible to feed that wake up tomorrow
morning feeling like meister eckhart
right feeling like you're just
inseparable from the pure capital b beam
that is consciousness right and then
there's no separate self there's a
self-transcending union with everything
you can perceive right I think that can
be had without any kind of religious dog
which is a mess just a matter of paying
close enough attention to the nature of
consciousness so the contemplatively is
the bait is one baby in the bath water
we can save the ethical life is another
baby we can save you don't have to
presuppose anything on insufficient
evidence to argue about what is right
and wrong and good and evil in in the
21st century and so is it fair to call
that a hypothesis that not just for some
people but for everyone the level of
well-being can be enhanced through
rational interaction with the questions
that dictate what we do that a
hypothesis slowly if that's a hypothesis
that the one additional fact that we
that makes that more or less moot is
that on certain points even if we felt
that really believe in the fiction were
what was it was advantageous to people
depending on which fiction you're
talking about they're simply just
there's too much evidence against it
that you can't you can't decide to
believe something for which you have no
evidence simply because of the good
effects it's a good experience it will
give you or you imagine it will give you
I mean as I said that's why Pascal's
wager never made any sense you can't say
the only way you can believe something
to be true really true not just
metaphorically true is to believe that
if it weren't true you wouldn't believe
it they you stand in some relationship
to its truth such that that is the
reason why you believe it now you can't
say you can't be telling yourself you
know I have no evidence for this thing
but I know life would be better if I
believed it to be true and so therefore
I really believe it's true
you don't think people do that all the
time I don't think they do I think they
do things much more like we're talking
the metaphorical truth we're talking
about you we act as if things are true
without forming any strong propositional
claim and that's fine that's fine that
has its own utility I mean you don't
think this is basically I mean we all
suspend disbelief when we go and watch a
movie and we sort of entitled a
moviemaker to to set the ground rules of
the space and if it's Harry Potter then
there are magic magical rings that can
happen and if it's some other story
maybe there aren't so we all have a
mechanism whereby we know we can suspend
disbelief and it's interesting to me
that you seem not to imagine that people
are doing that with respect to
metaphysical beliefs that have
implications for what the right actions
that they should take are why wouldn't
it be the case that that same sort of
mechanism would apply well it does apply
but there are people who are clearly
doing much more than that so I'm not if
that's all people were doing under the
ages of religion I wouldn't spend much
time worrying about religion that some
degree that's what people do you know as
you say going to caring about things
that at bottom we really shouldn't care
about so the world cup is on right now
and we you know literally billions of
people care
could care down to their toes what
happens to this little ball as it
traverses a lawn right and if it goes
into the net it really matters and if it
fails - it really matters and always
matters if we hit the target Sam but
this is this is something we have
manufactured to care about right you
know then it speaks to us it's quite
literally a game we this is a game that
people are playing but some people take
it in taking it further than you that
then seems truly rational is part of the
fun that's but but if they ate but the
people who can't turn that off metaphors
the talkers are metaphor yeah but there
but there are people who if they're you
know they're people you know the
full-back who kicks a known goal and
then goes back to his you know South
American village and gets murdered right
he's surrounded by people who are taking
the game too seriously yeah okay I agree
yes and so my problem with religion is
that so much of a time we're meeting
those people and what Edward yes and
we're not criticizing those people have
no place to stand to criticize those
people because we're so attached to the
game look why don't we don't actually do
this why don't you each take three
minutes to sum up so I think yet we are
there we are at the end of time so why
don't you each take three minutes sum up
and then we'll call it good yep okay
sure okay Sam went last you want to go
okay
first here okay so there's lots of
things about which Sam and I agree but
the Devils in the details of course no I
I'm very sympathetic to his claim that
we need to ground our ethical systems in
something solid and demonstrable my
problem is I'm not sure how to do that
when I I don't believe that you can
derive a value structure from your
experience of the observable facts
there's too many facts you need a
structure to interpret them and there
isn't very much of you and so part of
the reason part of the way that that's
addressed neurologically
is that you have an inbuilt structure
it's deep it's partly biological it's
partly an emergent consequence of of
your socialization and you view the
world of facts through that structure
and it's a structure of value
now that structure of value may be
derived from the world of facts over the
evolutionary timeframe but it's not
derived from the world of facts over the
timeframe that you inhabit and it can't
be so the problem I have in with our
discussion so far isn't really any of
Sam's fundamental ethical claims because
I do believe there's a distinction
between the hellish life and the
heavenly life say the life that everyone
would agree was absolutely not worth
living and the life we could imagine as
good and I do believe that we should be
moving from one to the other the
question is exactly how is it that we
make the decisions that will guide us
along that way and I don't believe we
can make them without that a priori
structure in fact I think the evidence
is absolutely overwhelming that we can't
and I mean also the scientific evidence
and I would like to go further into the
devil that's in those details and so
that's my situation at the moment
well part of these conversations and now
we've you and I've had I think for car
moved unto podcasts or a second live
event and thank you for doing this by
the way this is hey it's an honor to do
this and it's it comes with risks for
both of us I think you can sense we
don't have precisely the same audiences
all of you are sort of rooting for one
or the other of us to some degree or the
Spirit of Truth yes
and but clearly the conversation is the
point right this is not it though this
conversation had the character at many
moments of a debate I don't think either
of us view it as a debate in the the
trivial sense it's not about point
scoring it's about making sense in a way
that's consequential because we're
talking about issues of great
consequence and you obviously care about
these things and it matters whether we
converge on the most important questions
in human life and as you know I'm
worried that religion doesn't give us
the tools we need to converge what what
does give us the tools is a truly
open-ended conversation and what then
you simply have to look honestly at the
obstacles toward any conversation being
open-ended and religion presents those
first and most readily it's it is a the
idea that certain things have been
decided for all time and there's no
future evidence or argument that is
admissible on those points now that is
clearly bad everywhere in science it's
bad everywhere in in how we renegotiate
our proximity to one another in society
in new laws and new ideas are born all
the time about how to structure
institutions and social relationships
because new things happen and we didn't
have an internet and then we did so our
old laws and our old expectations of
human communication simply don't work in
the presence of this new thing right so
we have to figure out we again it's a
navigation problem and what I'm
perpetually in contest with even in
conversations like this is the sense
that the rules need to change just a
little bit for this class of books that
literally this side of the bookstore
right there's like any other part of the
bookstore well then there's no barrier
to honest conversation but you move over
here they've got this shelf of books
there you you have to hold your tongue
right there we can't pick and choose we
can't say that while we can say that
Shakespeare wrote some fantastic plays
the best players ever written and some
are actually not that good right we
can't say that about God right we have
to find some tortured way to make the
most of his diabolical utterances okay
that's the thing we have to outgrow and
so at what I'm continually in tension
with you is the degree to which your
style of talking about religion and nary
the power of narrative and and the
meaning derived from it Alive's that
point and seems to let people off the
hook on that very point and that's the
that's where we need to hold the line in
my view we need to we need to
[Music]
that that it has to be clear to us at
this moment in history that no one has
the right to their religious
sectarianism really I mean up to the
point clearly that there's a there's a
soccer there's a World Cup version of it
that is benign but once it gets taken
past that point we we have to figure out
how to pull the brakes and that becomes
a real problem if you are if you are
going to dignify the foundational claims
of these faiths claims like revelation
and paradigms and blasphemy and apostasy
these are the things that you will you
come up against and I think converse
conversations like this are incredibly
important because we we need to convince
the better part of humanity that is
possible to live the best life possible
without recourse to divisive nonsense
and where we draw the line between
divisive nonsense and reasoned and
necessary discourse is what we're we
were dickering over and i think i think
it's important that we we continue
so
in closing let me say first of all I'm
tremendously honored that you asked me
to moderate these debates yeah we've
it was a truly remarkable experience as
for what was accomplished I think it was
a tremendous amount I saw both of you
move I saw both of you exhibit
tremendous generosity of spirit towards
the other and I think this has exceeded
my expectations of what might have been
possible in these discussions by quite a
bit
and that also I will say has a lot to do
with the fact that for reasons I think
none of us can explain a huge amount of
people a huge population seems to care
about these issues because they matter a
great deal so anyway I think this has
been a very successful exercise and I
think you can both justly be quite proud
of what you've done all right let's give
a huge round of applause for our
speakers tonight
later so much
thank you very much
[Applause]