[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back this is the 24th episode of
awakening from the meaning crisis last
time we were talking about the
historical developments that happened
around caught we took a look at Conte
and Schopenhauer
and Nietzsche and I presented Nietzsche
as one of the great prophets I'm using
that in the Old Testament sense of a
prophet of the meaning crisis and we
talked about a way of understanding what
Nietzsche is saying now it's not just
simply atheism and we also took a look
at way in which Michi doesn't really
adequately give us a response to the
meaning crisis although he indicates
that an important project within the
response to the meaning crisis is how do
we reappropriation legacy the idea of
radical self transcendence within a
secular scientific worldview
now I want to go back to Kant and trace
out another important line of
development that's going to be crucial
for understanding the meaning crisis and
that's the line that comes from Conte
and to Hegel I can't go through all the
various important German thinkers like
Victor and Schelling but I want to talk
a lot about Hegel because of the
tremendous impact how Hegel has had on
the political landscape and the cultural
landscape surrounding the meaning crisis
and as we know Kant also had a deep
influence on the romantics who also have
a significant impact on Hegel so if you
remember Conte as this model of the way
the mind is framing reality in order to
produce what is rational within it and
that this was then taken by the Romantic
stand and reversed in an in an
interesting way that the closer you got
to the actual con
reestablishing in the contact with
reality the more you're reversing this
process of rationalization and you're
coming into contact with reality via
more irrational states of mind and what
Kant had of course is the idea of that
reality out here was the thing in itself
which we cannot directly interact with
we can only interact with our experience
you see how the the disconnection from
the world becomes radicalized and caught
and all the meaning is totally within a
self enclosed activity a self
constructed self constructing self
enclosed activity of the mind right and
the thing in here the thing in itself is
nothing that we can come into rational
contact with and that's why of course as
I said the romantics proposed this
radical idea sort of the exact opposite
of the actual revolution that by moving
into more irrational states we can
reestablish contact with reality
now Hegel is aware of both the romantic
response and the contine framework and
talking about hey goes from oh my gosh
Hegel is a Titanic and complex and
difficult thinker and so once again I
want to remind everybody that I'm trying
to cut through a lot of material in
trying to zero in on those aspects of
Hegel's thought that are I think
directly relevant to understanding the
genealogy of the meaning crisis so what
Hegel says first of all is that this
idea makes no sense
Hegel points out that the thing in
itself is completely unknowable and for
something to be completely unknowable he
argues is indistinguishable from it
being non-existent there is nothing that
can possibly be knowing about it right
then we should stop thinking about it as
something that exists something that
should be taken into account when we're
talking about a relationship to reality
and if you remove the thing in itself
then you get this idea
that reality is totally found within
this structure this is of course a form
of idealism which has nothing to do with
pursuing ideal idealism is the idea that
reality is ultimately constructed made
by the mind in some fashion and so Hegel
makes the famous claim that the real is
the rational that this rational stuff
and reality are actually identical if
you get rid of this side of the equation
the thing in itself all you're left with
is this that reality is the rational the
real is the rational and the rational is
the real and this of course is an
important derivation I think is a
correct way of putting it from the
original insight from Parmenides that we
saw exemplified in Plato that there's a
deep connection between being and being
known that there's a deep connection
between our sensing something as real
and I don't mean just physically sensing
I mean making sense are sensing
something as real and how intelligible
it is to us how knowable it is to us and
pearl in his book thinking being the
classical addition to metaphysics just
does a fantastic job at explaining how
profoundly fecund this idea has been for
us so Hegel takes that Platonic
inspiration and he he weds it to a
critique of the thing in itself and then
we get this idea that what's what's
going on actually is not just not that
the mind like in kata is making the
structures of rational experience of
reality no no you get the DES mind is
actually making the structures of
reality itself well what about the
irrational stuff that the romantics were
talking about well he go sort of re
understands and reinterprets these
developmentally he understands
the irrational aspects of the mind right
not as us moving towards the contact
with the unknowable thing in itself
instead the irrational aspects of the
mind are actually a potential within the
mind a developmental potential for
rationality so the idea is are rational
in intelligible experience it has not
fully developed has not been fully self
actualized and you can hear the
Aristotelian aspects in Hegel's thought
now when I start talking about mind in
this way and rationality
they have to be very careful we're not
talking about mind um in a sense that's
your mind in the individual mind we're
talking about mind in an extended sense
we're talking about the entire system of
patterns of intelligibility that are at
work in humanity all of the patterns of
intelligibility that we're using to make
sense in this profound way so if you
think about this room for example and my
mind is structuring my experience and
then if you give Hegel his critique of
content there's nothing beyond the
structuring of experience then you have
the idea that this is all in sense in a
deeply metaphysical sense this is all
the activity of these patterns of
intelligibility the patterns of
intelligibility and reality are this is
this mind in this extended sense so try
to think of these patterns of
intelligibility as structuring reality
not just the experience of reality and
that they form a living system they're
developing like an era Staller it's like
a living thing they're going through a
process of self actualization the
irrational elements are constantly being
transformed into more rational
intelligible elements so the Germans
have a great word for all of this the
word Geist and like all German words it
doesn't translate that readily into
English it covers these two words that
we separate in English and it overlaps
between them mind and spirit because
what it's trying to pick up on again
this living systems of patterns and of
intelligibility by which we all timidly
make sense and given this argument
against a renewable reality being a
reality then the patterns by making
sense are identical to the patterns by
which reality is intelligibly structured
so this is an individual idealism this
is what's going to become known as
absolute idealism because the absolute
is another term that's used for this
system of self realization of the
patterns of intelligibility rather than
talking about an individual mind I'm
trying not to get too abstract here but
it's hard not to be abstract when you're
talking about
Hegel's idealism and so my task with you
is to try and explain this in a way that
constantly makes it plausible to you and
also at least viable so you can see why
it became an attractive way of thinking
if you deeply by Conte and the Romantics
and yet you accept Hegel's argument
against this you reinterpret the
romantics the way he did you get this
position how do you study it how do you
understand it how do you study this
living systems of patterns of
intelligibility that structure
experience and reality
well you study history and here you can
see of course the deep influence of
Christianity and going back to the axial
revolution within ancient Israel about
understanding history as the process by
which reality and our understanding of
reality are Co unfolding together so you
study history and you look for patterns
and
right the history what are you looking
what kind of patterns right these are
patterns in how we have systematically
made sense how cultures have created
world views ways of making sense ways in
which we have as I've often used the the
metaphor we've created grammars by which
we make sense of ourselves and the world
so you can see some of the influence of
Hegel on some of the terms and ideas
that I've been using as we've been in
engaging in our historical analysis okay
so these are patterns we realize and I
want to really pick up on the double
meaning of this word like alright I've
indicated before when realizing means
here both that it is something we
experience but it is also a way in which
things are being made real coming into
realness coming into reality in a
developmental sense so we're talking
about looking at history to discover the
development of this grammar of
intelligibility this grammar of human
thinking human being human living how
humans are world Inge how they're
creating worlds of of intelligible
patterns in which we can act in a
meaningfully meaningful manner and
understand ourselves the world in each
other and what you discover Hegel said
is if you look at this history you you
see it's not static you can see that it
is going through a developmental process
and that development is driven by sort
of two opposing movements or forces one
is a process of differentiation
so think about when you're trying to
make sense what do you have to do often
right you have to grasp the differences
between things you have to distinguish
you have to clarify you have to contrast
so what a good way of thinking about
this is this term we use articulation
articulation means to speak and to make
sense but it also means to find all the
joints find the division points between
things so part of what we're doing right
is when we're trying to make sense we're
engaging in a process of differentiation
articulation but of course we also are
doing the other right we are doing
integration we are gathering things
together so that we have systematic
connections are being realized
again it's we're not we're becoming
aware of them but we're also
constituting them and making them and
again not as individuals but as
participants right in this project of
how the patterns of intelligibility are
working themselves out through our
thought through our behavior through our
ways of living and being in the world
so Hegel understands the process of
understanding as of the creation of a
system or systematization because when
I'm doing this when I'm differentiating
things and also integrating them
together I'm putting them into a
systematic relationship and so let me
give you an analogy right for for
understanding Hegel please remember it's
an analogy so when you study child
development you can see children have
ways of making sense of the world and
that discloses the world to them in a
certain way and that way in which they
make sense works for them it gives them
a certain understanding
but what happens as you go through
stages of development is that that
system gets incredibly improved things
that were often confused together get
differentiated apart and they get
reintegrated so that you get a more
sophisticated systematic understanding
of the world and again when I say this
understanding you have to understand
that it means right
not just in your head but how the world
is structured for you so you've got this
living system of patterns of
intelligibility and you see across
history that it's always being
articulated by differentiation and then
being integrated into a systematic way
of understanding being and not just
being but how the world is being to us
so higgles thought he saw this internal
development in Geist that this is his
name as I said for this explosion of an
extended mind right it was it had an
internal development much like a living
thing much like a child right so what
what do you see happening what you'll
see in the history of ideas as we try to
make sense of things you'll see an idea
is proposed particular idea a way of
understanding and it gets contrasted
right it gets clarified it gets
distinguished it gets differentiated
from a counter idea
but then what typically happens right is
that these two ideas then are drawn
together into a higher integration now
this is often popularly explained the
Hegel doesn't actually use these terms
this way but this is often explained by
this idea of thesis antithesis and
synthesis right
so the idea is you get an idea you'll
get a counter idea it's integrated
together and then this serves as a new
idea to start the whole process again
there's the counter idea right and then
that gets integrated and so on and so
forth and what you have is the
increasing articulation and integration
of the patterns of intelligibility which
for Hegel given the argument are also
the patterns of realness the patterns of
reality you get this incredible
complexification you get emerging
capacities for understanding and being
in the world he calls this process
dialectic alright so just give a quick
example from the history of ideas right
you have people who are trying to write
get out what is reality what kind of
thing is reality and you'll have certain
people like Parmenides and Plato and
saying well being right for things to be
is ultimately for thing right reality is
changeless because when I know something
I know it to be true and for things to
be true right it has to be that that's
the way they really are and if they're
changing and I try to know them I can't
ever get a true grasp of them and you
get this idea that reality is changeless
right and then you get people like
Heraclitus and others saying no no if
you do that then the whole capacity for
understanding understanding your
experience of reality that things are
changing if you if you write off all
that experience as an illusion then
there's no content to your experience
there's nothing actually that you're
having an experience about in fact they
argue the opposite that reality is pure
change
so you got Parmenides right and an
aspect of Plato and then you got
Heraclitus now to be real is to be
unchanging no to be real is to be
changing and you know you can see this
where people in our culture they'll talk
about reality as if it's eternity but
they'll also talk about there's nothing
as real as change itself that reality is
always in process and then Plato comes
along as we've seen and proposes a way
of integrating them together and what he
says is know that there are eternal
patterns and they write structurally
organize changing processes and if you
remember that maps on to this is more
having to do with the upper world the
more real world and this is the more
looser your world and you can see this
played out in our science what do you
think you say what do you mean John well
science is built around the idea that
there are these eternal patterns laws
and yet they constrain and interact with
forces which are defined completely and
how they change things and so science
right is a synthesis out of these two
ways of trying to understand reality
okay and it ultimately goes back to
Plato and we and we use math to talk
about this and we use experiments to
talk about this and and so forth okay so
this is not a ridiculous idea that Hegel
has it's a profound idea you can see it
at work and if you talk about something
to use I think a strong analogy about
how science is progressing and something
about the patterns that science
discovers are also the patterns of
reality then you have something strongly
analogous to how how Hegel is thinking
of Geist
so this dialectic even the term that
Hegel uses by the way this is inspired
by Plato although I think Hegel's
interpretation of dialectic is very
different from plato's but this whole
process of the way in which Geist is
historically developing is a process of
self transcendence on Geist's part
emergence it's the way in which Geist is
developing self actualizing the way in
which it is moving from a more and more
irrational making sense to a more and
more rational systematic making sense so
Hegel proposes that in the history of
dialectic we can get to a stage where
the system of understanding and
realization becomes aware of itself that
one of the things the one of the ideas
one of those systems of making sense
that emerges is this idea itself and you
see what that means and and and there's
there's there's there's hubris and Hegel
here right because what Hegel is
basically saying is his philosophy is
the philosophy in which this process of
Geist and realization has become
reflectively aware of it in which this
practice process has created a
systematic understanding that grasps the
dialectical principles of Geist when you
get that then you have what he calls
right absolute spirit absolute Geist
there's this T loss there's this goal in
this whole process all of history is
moving and of course he now sees himself
as the discoverer of this but all of
history is move
to this moment of absolute idealism so
rationality is seen as a systematic
process in the self-development of guyst
of its self understanding now many of
you probably finding that this is very
impersonal way of talking about mind and
meaning and we will come back to that so
hold on to that we will come back to
that so when the process of making sense
of understanding passes into this stage
of self understanding when the process
creates systems of ideas that grasp this
pattern of dialectic then Hegel says
that what's happened is we have moved
from understanding with a capital u
because it's not individual
understanding but the understanding in
Geist to reasoned with a capital R so
what does he mean by that the principles
of rationally making sense this living
system of principles for rashly making
sense moves from understanding things to
understanding everything systematically
all the things are getting integrated
into a systematic understanding and that
systematic understanding is now self
reflective it includes and refers and
grasps itself
in a very deep sense rationality has
realized itself there's very powerful
way of thinking and put this all
together with the original and crucial
premise of idealism right if this is a
process by which reality realizes itself
and the real is the rational this was
also a process by which reality realizes
itself this process at work in in and
through us and in and through history by
which reality and rationality have like
realized themselves is God you see what
Hegel is done he's taken again as I've
mentioned this right
Hebrew Christian idea that God is right
that process by which we make sense and
we develop and create the world with God
and he has created a philosophical
understanding of that and it translated
that religious way of talking about
history into a completely secular
philosophical way of talking about
history he has secularized and
rationalized
the Hebrew ik the Hebraic heritage
now this is important right because this
God is in in many senses right a
secularized non-religious God this is
not a God that is right intervening in
history through profits this is a God
who has been realized through the
reflective actions the contemplation of
a philosopher Hegel
Hegel understood his project in very
religious terms but and this is a very
important but he was always translating
those religious terms into philosophical
conceptual terms of rational development
he would consistently take the religious
terms and go through this kind of
translation this kind of exposition and
explication and explanation that would
transform them into philosophical
conceptual theories of how rationality
intelligibility and reality have Co
developed together so I'm gonna read
your quote from the earliest system
program of German idealism he states the
following quote here I shall discuss an
idea which as far as I know has not
occurred to anyone else we must have a
new mythology notice the word he's using
notice he's using that word in a way
that resonates how we've been using the
word mythology in this lecture series we
must have a new mythology but this
mythology must be in the service of the
ideas notice that language it must be in
the service of the ideas it must be a
mythology of reason capital our reason
it must be about this he goes on to say
quote in the end enlightened and
unenlightened must clasp hands
right the the philosophical and the
mythological the enlightened and the
unenlightened and notice the language
enlightened right must clasp hands
mythology must become philosophy in
order to make the people rational and
philosophy must become mythological in
order to make philosophy and sorry in
order to make philosophers sensible
notice that this is simultaneously a
philosophical proposal and a social
cultural program
for how to transform religion people and
the role of philosophy within that
transformation he then goes on to say
that this will lead to a quote higher
spirit sent from heaven must found the
new religion right among us it will be
the last and greatest work of mankind
this is the final utopia this is the
culmination this will be the last
religion this will be the last thing
because all of this results in this
final stage in which Geist pattern this
living system of patterns of
intelligibility and how reality itself
is structured has generated a systematic
self understanding and we grasp all of
our previous cultural and intellectual
history I want to show you how Hegel
does this in a specific example this
this translation between mythology and
philosophy to create the new religion
that is beyond right all other religions
so let's think of the process by which
understanding right is moving to reason
and you can see that right that's
directly parallel to the process by
which mythology is moving to philosophy
so let's get an example of a very
important mythological structure and of
course I'm gonna take Christianity
because I tried to show you Hegel is
secularizing Christianity in many ways
so you Hegel argues that right let's put
the myth on this side and then the fill
it with the philosophy on this side and
we're going to see how we go from making
sense of things to this self-realization
participating in that the the system
that grasps the systematicity of this
whole process so you have the Father and
the Trinity what does the father
represent well the father represents
Hegel would argue understanding is
undifferentiated unarticulated unnatural
eyes
unarticulated an actual eyes I am
okay and then of course the idea is you
get the incarnation in the Sun sorry
that should be capitalized I don't mean
any disrespect
right now the incarnation is how our
understanding starts to get
differentiated into particulars here is
a table here's a cop right I'm here
the worlds over there we get all this
articulation so you get the beginning of
right articulation in two particular
things and so you can see there's a
sense in which right the Sun is the
counter the antithesis of the Father all
right but then you get right the
reconcile the reconciliation of the son
to the Father you know there's the sign
is sacrificed and the son reconciles
with the father
and that of course is right that moment
of higher integration a higher new kind
of identity is created so this is this
corresponds to the realization again
trying to pick up of both meanings of
this term the realization of the
identity indifference of the father in
son
so the father and son are both different
in one and that's how understanding is
now moving to this process where the
integration and the differentiation are
being brought together understanding is
realizing that understanding is made out
of differentiation and integration and
there's a kind of reconciliation a
higher-order self-awareness that is
taking place and then we finally moved
down here right to the Holy Spirit and
of course there's a bit of a pun
intended because that's you know Geist
is one way of translating spirit and
this is what what did we see in the New
Testament the idea that God is agape God
is identical to the very process by
which we are making each other into
persons and we don't individually
possess agape in our minds cappe is
agape is something we dwell within a
process of making sense and making
persons and making community of persons
and of course what does the holy spirit
corresponds to well this is that right
this is Geist dwelling within its self
awareness
God has always been agape we just didn't
realize it God is dwelling within the
development of the community this is
what Hegel's doing this is why Hegel has
been called the Thomas Aquinas
Protestantism he's doing right in
Germany post the Protestant Reformation
what Aquinas was doing when if you
remember when European fought the
systems of European thought encountered
Aristotelian science Hegel is now taking
right all of the machinery right the
theological machinery that he sees at
work in myth and he is integrating it
with the philosophical and scientific
understanding that is impacting so
powerfully on Europe in his time he's
trying to deal with how to restructure
Christianity in light of the Scientific
Revolution the Protestant Reformation
and this is what he's doing and he
creates this powerful system it's this
just tremendously powerful system it's
grand synthesis and that's important
because Hegel felt and I said there's an
element of hubris in here but that his
system exemplified what it was talking
about his philosophical system in the
way it provided at a total present in
that word a total explanation of reality
mind being God religion philosophy
history
he thought it exemplified it
demonstrated it and so German idealism
was just massively influential because
of this grand synthesis that it offered
but you can see what's going on here
right you can see that this is a very
powerful attempt to try and save the
meaning making machinery and salvage the
axial legacy and somehow give us an
account of right how we can still
develop an increasing contact with
reality in a way that is ultimately
spiritual and rational at the same time
Hegel is in many ways a Titanic figure
trying to provide a powerful grammar
philosophical set of you know concepts
the conceptual vocabulary and and and
theoretical the theoretical principles
for structuring that vocabulary he's
trying to create a grammar by which we
can deeply respond to the meaning crisis
he's enormous ly popular and as I said
this this form of German idealism
spreads across Europe very powerful ways
deeply influential you'll even see
figures within America like Josiah Royce
early on in the Kalista intellectual
history of America deeply influenced by
Hegel so why why is this important well
Hegel is just gonna have a profound
impact on any future attempts to try and
respond to their meaning crisis just
because of the way he's trying to
synthesize everything together but
what's more important is for many people
this form of idealism German idealism
has completely collapsed it doesn't it's
no longer considered a viable position
now I'm not here to argue about this
sort of an abstract philosophical level
I'm right because there of course there
are many defenders of Hegel today I want
to take a look at what has happened
right in the critical response to Hegel
and how that has infused the development
and the intensification of the meaning
crisis remember Hegel sets up this
pattern of secularizing religion into
systems of ideas that attempt to give us
a total explanation and guide he's the
Godfather in this sense of totalitarian
ideologies
so you have three main avenues of seeing
response we already did one the person
who has a right deep critique of Hegel
is Schopenhauer because and as you
remember Schopenhauer understands the
relationship not the way Hegel does in
terms of reason
Schopenhauer understands it in terms of
will the will to live and then Nietzsche
takes that up as the will to power and
he tries to use that as a way of
recapturing right self-transcendent so
we've already talked about that so I'm
not going to go over that again but
please remember it right so the fact
that the aspect of will and the will to
live and the will to power wasn't
adequately being addressed was what
Schopenhauer points to okay and then we
have of course the tremendous critique
of kirkegaard right where the guard
famously said Hegel made a system and
then sat down beside it what's he what's
he pointing out here there's an
impersonal ISM there's a lack of
perspectival and participatory knowing
in Hegel's whole proposal it has been
rendered into a system of ideas all of
this right
all of this connectedness to reality to
ourselves and to each other all of this
process by which we cultivate wisdom and
self transcendence has been rendered
into a system of beliefs the system of
ideas perspectival and participatory
knowing have been lost the only
participation we have is in our
understanding and appreciation of the
Hegelian system
now what does that mean trigger-guard is
pointing out I believe to the idea that
this our attempt to make contact with
what's most real or attempt to realize
the divine like in platonic and agog a
and put plato's dialectic was linked to
deeply to an agog a has been completely
severed from personal transformation and
self transcendence you do not have to
undergo any radical change you do not
have to have mystical experience you
don't have to have a higher state of
consciousness you do not have to have a
encountered a Socratic challenge
theology has has become completely
conceptual propositional rational self
reflection it is not in any way engaged
with projects of transformative
experience
Westphal in his book transcendent and
self transcendence echoes this critique
and points out that while Hegel is
proposing this tremendous epistemic self
transcendence we come to know how we
know he has lost the canoe the deep
connection you saw in Wright in Plato -
what Westfall I'm not quite happy with
this calls with this term but he calls
it like ethical self transcendent this
is the process by which we become
radically different we overcome our ego
centrism we become more capable of a
gothic love and kirkegaard points out I
think quite correctly that when we move
through those transformative experiences
it requires what he would call a leap of
faith and this is a very dangerous
concept and I'm not going to try and
defend it but I think this makes sense
given what we've already seen in the
work of La Paul and others that going
through these transformative experiences
is not something you can reason your way
through we exist before we
discovered this essence about who and
what we are that's the whole point of
existentialism as I mentioned so what
kirkegaard is pointing out is that this
system for all of its grandeur is in a
very deep sense like what Socrates found
with the original natural philosophers
it is profound truths that have no
existential transformative relevance you
cannot find in Hegel how to call how to
cultivate wisdom you can only find a
theoretical structure for interpreting
history what about Marx Marx is the
other great critic of Hegel and I hope
you're seeing a pattern here what's
missing is the connection to will write
our participatory respectable
involvement what's missing here is the
connection to transformative experience
to ethical self transcendence what's
missing here according to Marx well what
Marx is basically arguing again Marx
unlike me God you know to just know the
Titanic things we're talking about here
and and and there's there's all these
aspects of Marx I can't touch on like
this whole economic critique and and
that's not what I'm trying to do here
March is basically saying right
that history is not driven by think of
Plato think of the man and the lion and
the monster history is not driven by
reason by the man history is driven by
the monster right it's driven by our
socio-economic activity as we try to
provide for our material existence
so marks was of course deeply influenced
also by flora Bach which means fire
stream it's a great name and mark says
you can't understand me unless you have
passed through the fire stream of fire
box work Feuerbach made this proposal
that religion contra de Hegel that
religion is not the arena in which Geist
has been unfolding itself and reality
and intelligibility had been
co-developing instead he argues that
religion is a projection a term of
course that Freud and Jung are going to
pick up on that when I'm thinking about
God what I'm actually doing is
projecting an ideal model of my own
humanity and firebox idea is that this
projection distorts and distracts us
deludes us and it ultimately alienates
human beings from their own role within
historical processes so March is going
to take up this idea this critique of
religion and he's going to see religion
not as Hegel does as you know the the
the vessel and vehicle in which Geist is
unfolding itself he's going to see
religion as a noxious projection that is
actually deluding people and distracting
them from how they are the authors of
history so what Marx does is he says
okay once we get rid of the religious
distortion and we shift to the material
monster we see the dialectic at work
there the dialectic is a dialectical
materialism not a dialectical idealism
right so the clash is not between ideas
that are contrasting and integrating the
clash is a process of political struggle
between opposing ways of socio economic
life we have different classes that's
what the class is a socio-economic way
of life that opposed
the the idea of this distinction and
articulation has been turned into one of
conflict between these classes but these
classes are nevertheless systematically
related they are interdependent
they rely and define each other so
history is a dialectic good is
constantly through these clash these
conflict the political struggle between
the classes is working out the self
contradictions in socio-economic life
this is what this is the core of Marx's
critique of capitalism that contains all
these inherent self contradictions and
that this process this process of
political struggle and violence will
work out the self contradictions in our
socio-economic activity until we achieve
a political state of peace and freedom
the promised land
always the attempt to find the promised
land so what is Marx done do you see
he's actually in a sense completing I'm
not trying to justify I'm just saying
he's developing and bringing to a kind
of logical conclusion the secularization
implicit in Hegel and he's supplying I
have criticisms of of this being an
adequate solution but this is what he
sees himself doing he sees himself
supplying the missing participant the
missing participation that we don't have
in Hegel how do you participate in Hegel
well Marx says this is how you
participate a call to arms right you
know the philosophers have only talked
about the world right the communists
want to change it that's the Communist
Manifesto
right we you know workers of the world
unite we have nothing to lose but our
chains the idea is the the dialectic and
participation come together in the idea
of political socio-economic revolution
and you can also see elements of will
violent ideologies violent totalizing
ideologies that promise a secular utopia
that is the culmination of the internal
logic of history so you have this deep
political
ization of the process by which people
are supposed to try and have faith since
the course of history participate in the
Karl's you see the Kairos of
Christianity has become the revolution
the turning point in history that you
have to participate in you have to be on
the right side you have to bring about
the utopia so these three critiques all
push this is of course pushing towards
existentialism this is a religious kind
of existentialism this through Nietzsche
is pushing towards a an anti religious
existentialism this of course is pushing
towards maersk Marxism but what they all
share right is they share a sense that
Hegel's totalizing ideology has not
captured the core of human meaning
making well take a look at how this
ramifies through germany and the next
episode thank you very much for your
time and attention
[Music]
you
you