[Music]
hello you found the portal
I'm your host Weinstein and I'm lucky to
be here tonight with Ana and here it
comes
Hatchin thanks for having me oh did I
screw that up no no no no that's right
and Ana is half of the up-and-coming
podcast Red Scare which has everyone
talking everyone everyone I'm
exaggerating slightly yeah yeah but it's
a I just got introduced to you by a
colleague of mine Blake masters Peter
teals co-author and I've been addicted
to your podcast not quite understanding
why it's one of the strangest things
I've ever found can you say more about
what induced you to do it and why you
think it might be working I have no clue
why it's working I know that it's
probably due to some sort of alchemical
in articulable thing that's totally out
of my control that has something to do
with my chemistry with my co-host who's
an actress called Donna crossover but I
think maybe it struck a chord I know
that it consistently infuriates all the
wrong people which was never my
intention so innocent yeah and that's so
beautiful but it's also not entirely
believable because it does seem like
what you're doing is you're crowding out
a certain kind of pious Ness
and we had an epic lunch the other day
yeah we did we had what they call a
Power Lunch is that a Power Lunch yeah
yeah okay okay
I just learned at the last minute that
this podcast is being filmed because I
was telling Eric here the the way that
we're on ours is like a bunch of wires
and crap strewn on the floor like
chain-smoking
doll just literally sits on the ground
objecting objectifying herself at every
turn and I sit on my disgusting stained
and cigarette burned couch but this is
my bad side and I wish I was more of a
diva like Mariah Carey and could demand
that we switched seats we
yeah I know I'm kidding and being
hyperbolic well and we always pick up
the syringes before the game yeah anyway
what was the question
well the question surrounds what I was
going to get at is that we had this bit
of a riff where I've said that I'm
trying to be long good and short nice
that nice doesn't really have a future
because nice is really this kind of
performative version that crowds out
good mm-hmm and you seem to have
mastered this form formula where I
detect a deeply buried good and there's
an attack on nice at all times yeah I
mean I think the nice on some level is a
futile position I mean even you look at
like female social politics right and
there's always kind of a repentant
bitches masquerading as nice girls and
then there's nice girls masquerading as
a repentant bitches and I think I would
like to think that I'm the latter
remains to be seen yeah I don't know
that I have any sort of earnest or let's
say let's put it this way I don't know
that I have kind of a sustained
political vision that I would like to
enact it's kind of out of my control as
you know my father who's used to Sager
but a crumb floating on the face of the
earth but to build your confident it's
like Russian self esteem but at the end
of the day I have kind of a very earnest
ethical agenda that I'm hoping to
populate the minds of my young girl and
gay listeners with I would have said in
effect but okay populate yeah yeah yeah
in fact is another good one wonderful so
let's let's just do a little bit of your
background as you're mining it yeah for
the kind of motif that even though it's
an intrinsically American show it's
informed by this sort of broad Slavic
soul and you were born in in Moscow in
Moscow yeah in 1985 the internet and my
spanish wikipedia says that it's 1986 i
every year i'm aging backwards on the
next year I'll be 32 yeah that's great
yeah I'm like the Benjamin buttons of
neoliberal critique and but I was born
in 1985 at the tail end you know right
before the collapse of the Soviet Union
and there's no way that that experience
along with the kind of inevitable trauma
of immigration doesn't inform your
worldview so if I understand correctly
not only are you coming with this sort
of tail end Soviet influence but it is
also the case that you've got access to
to the the twin genocides of Jews and
Armenians that's true yeah I always say
on Twitter it's very depressing that you
know my ancestors survived the Armenian
Genocide and then the Holocaust so their
descendant could become a podcaster in
Brooklyn now Manhattan and no doubt
because you're white of hue you are
going to be labeled as privileged
because you come from these two ethnic
groups which for some priests we can't
actually locate in human history or what
these groups have been through which I
find also really amusing this is a very
I mean this isn't a very interesting
point I don't know if we want it I'm not
drunk yet so maybe we should get into
the intellect oh yeah let's write a
surprise yeah you I don't so I'll get
into all the kind of like heavy-handed
intellectual stuff in the first half
let's say but this is one of I think my
central projects or critiques that I'm
interested in I don't obviously I don't
dispute the completely gross horrific
legacy of American slavery right it
existed it plunged an entire population
into poverty into social fragmentation
the legacy is still alive and well today
what I object to I think is the
wholesale export of the American
view of race relations to elsewhere in
the world to people who don't have the
similar experience well I guess from my
perspective what I find very odd about
all of this is that having been close to
people in the Armenian and Jewish
communities there's a tremendous amount
of intergenerational trauma yes because
there has to be yeah but my sister and I
call it hand-me-down trauma yeah it's
something you inherit you know like a
brush or like a necklace well I would
say it's also a set of behavior patterns
yeah tek ting when things are starting
to get really dicey like you have to
know that it's not that the generation
that goes through these things is the
only one that has a claim the longevity
of these populations is about saying we
don't know whether there's going to be
another one of these episodes in your
time so everyone always has to be ready
there's no state of not being ready like
we've made it we finally yeah we're
orthodontist we're gonna be fine
yeah I mean you can't rest on your
laurels effectively and I think you have
to sleep with one eye open them yes well
yeah the you know you with a knife under
your pillow you're gonna give away all
of our secrets yeah I have so many dark
family secrets but um the I think the
basic correct principle the basic
critique of certain I guess leftist
intellectuals in the United States is
this idea that okay well somebody like
me is not only why not only would be
associated as white or would consider
herself white but is essentially white
passing so therefore even if I was not
hypothetically white I could rake in the
certain white privilege that for example
or a black or Latino person couldn't
this is what I've called the
intersectional shakedown yeah and the
the populations that are maximally
irritating to the an intersectional
shakedown artists are the populations
with recent claims to oppression that
are nevertheless making it economically
because really what it is isn't it
tempt to take a real history of
oppression and to turn into cash yes
well I tweeted literally today moments
before I came here that the kind of idea
of cultural appropriation that debate
makes perfect sense in a culture where
identity is viewed as a form of capital
because it becomes in a zero-sum game if
somebody like Rachel Dolezal right
perpetuates this myth that she's a black
woman she is basically taking food out
of the mouths power out of the hands of
an actually black woman right so there's
that absurdity but then we actually have
to contend with the weird aspect for
example if you look at the exploitation
of black musicians who very often you
know at some point you had a lot of
illiterate genius musicians in the Delta
who were brilliant enough to produce
great music but weren't capable of
defending themselves in a legal
structure right and so you actually had
cultural exploitation of one group by
another through appropriation so you'd
get you know I think at some point I saw
Otis Blackwell performing in New York
City and you know he had to say look I'm
the guy behind Elvis Presley right and
the idea is that when Elvis sang it it
was acceptable to a market that he
couldn't sell into so there is a real
aspect to cultural appropriation and
there's a totally fake aspect yes which
is this sort of and they're coexisting
and so is very tempting for people like
us just to point at the bullshit yeah
but there actually is this unfortunate
reality that's braided with it yeah
absolutely no pun intended
sorry elaborate it the box braids um no
but it's it's absolutely true I mean you
can give the example of like hash and
The Sopranos right we talked about The
Sopranos at our Power Lunch who's this
guy who's kind of this like kindly
sensible Jewish grandfather you know
Mafia con within a mafia context as
warrant so warm and loving and steadily
and this is a guy who has historically
stiffed black musicians for royalties
right and there's that famous
reparations episode with I think it was
Boheme
buying playing the the rapper mini gark
there's a question about whether he's
going to visit violence upon him but it
turns out he's gonna visit a lawsuit yes
yeah exactly
but then you have like these cultural
examples of like you know like Katy
Perry or Miley Cyrus wearing cornrows
like Kim Kardashian wearing cornrows in
a Kardashian like Beauty photoshoot
which I find completely preposterous no
one ovince cornrows I don't know enough
about well nobody female hairstyle there
is no direct line of monetization right
okay I don't see it that way and so that
that's a discourse that I think yeah
you're right exists is like a proxy
discourse because people are afraid to
confront the deeper more complex issues
well I think that in you have one set of
legitimate issues acting as the stalking
horse for this infernal shake tenem my
hatred of this comes from the fact that
if American Jews who have made it
financially in one generation are
somehow safe and secure and therefore
privileged hmm something is entirely
broken with your cosmology mm-hmm well
how do you mean well it's just like I
assume that the German Jews in the you
know before Chris thought that two
nights before Kristallnacht were
privileged yes and should be worried
about their privilege it's just this is
stupid
yeah it's a silly argument and I think
you know I get into spats about listen
I'm I'm frequently accused of like being
racially insensitive and I you know as
Quentin's the late great Quentin
Tarantino said I reject that hypothesis
it's patently false what I've always
said is not I'm not in the business I'm
not interested in having an oppression
Olympics and saying like well okay look
I come from a historically oppressed
background and two sides but yeah I you
know grew up in it well I totally
middle-class milieu and you know but I'm
gonna use this kind of identitarian card
I'm gonna play the card to be oppressed
that's not at all what I'm interested in
what I'm saying is that as a person who
comes from a different
culture I can view the legacy of
American slavery at a critical distance
in a way that American people may not be
able to write because in Russia you have
a parallel system called serfdom right
these the slaves and the serfs were
emancipated within I think a year of
each other right but I mean I just had
JD Vance in your chair uh uh I've heard
only horrible things about him oh yeah
I'll introduce you like I'm quite a bit
he you know his family of course is
coming from Appalachia and Hillbillies
were de facto enslaved may be a form of
light slavery if you will just be served
him as a different form of enslavement
mm-hmm with company towns company script
company stores company housing private
armies of detective agencies so you know
the idea that that is seen through the
lens of white privilege shows you the
implemental impoverishment of the
current woke ideology and my claim is
that we cannot afford to dispute it we
must ignore it just because it it sort
of shouldn't qualify intellectually like
it didn't make I mean as a George Bush
ii said you don't negotiate with
terrorists and this is I think my big
opposition to it is that woek ideology
by and large is an mo ism and most like
an emotional hostage situation it really
is it's a it's a hostage crisis yeah
well you seem to know you seem to be
ignoring the credible threat to your
reputation fact it's making your
reputation yeah but so you're
metabolizing this kind of weird
resentment and hatred that people are
experiencing through fear because these
are reputational attacks ISM in general
they they're attacks that say I'm going
to make it impossible for you to earn a
normal living by a Tet by making an
attack on the reputation which you need
to negotiate the institutional world
yeah and it's like you know it's Jordan
Peterson famously said like I've figured
out a way to monetize the sjw's and you
know you could possibly say that about
Brad's scare but the it's not
kind of no I think you guys are doing
something much more bizarre yeah yeah I
agree it's not intended in that way but
that that was never the premise or the
interest it was kind of this earnest it
was truly kind of an earnest frustration
with liberal mainstream feminism and
liberalism I don't even know whether
it's liberalism I mean like everything
is so watered down and metastatic and
bizarre yeah that it's the vague whiff
of the left gone mad
yeah right like it's not liberal it's
not progressive we don't even know what
it is just sort of technical in Servat
of either right no you can't rightfully
call it that self-hatred is obviously a
very large part of it I think
yeah self-hatred I mean this is another
kind of you know I repeat myself loudly
and often well duh according to the
advice of my hero Quentin crisp who said
that that was kind of the way to be make
yourself memorable and it the problem
with the left and I'm talking about kind
of primarily the online left is that
these are people who are thoroughly
infected with the virus of the
neoliberal ethos they're completely they
play completely within the terms of the
system and you know it this brings to
bear a very important point that I also
like to repeat loudly and often by the
New Left critic Christopher lash and I'm
going to paraphrase it because I don't
know it verbatim because my synapses
have been shafted by being too extremely
online you know but he said like hey you
know all the kind of traditional
bedrocks all of the traditional values
and institutions of liberal society
we're talking about monogamy marriage
the gender binary any number of other
kind of traditional values have already
been been dealt a serious blow by
advanced capitalism itself
long before the social justice activists
got their hands on them before they
mounted a
against them and that's a very important
point to remember so the way I see it
and you'll let me know if this dovetails
are in fact conflicts or maybe it's just
total myths is that the family and the
religion or culture provide many of the
same things that the market provides
like let's say an insurance policy
mm-hmm all right so for example if
you're trying to smooth your income
stream over a lifetime and you have
recessions a family might take in some
members who are out of work and put them
to work in portions of the family
business that are still functioning or
work inside the home in a way that sort
of socializes some of the risk and at
the same time you might buy some kind of
a policy to try to smooth things out you
know or you'll try to save in an
institutional context as these things
conflict the market has denatured some
of these older structures when people
talk about American families are weak
what they usually mean is is that
American markets have been regular and
strong enough that people have leaned
less on the pathologies of their
mishpocha in order to try to get cleaner
expressions within the market for their
various needs like instead of having you
know a mother come and be with a child
with a new babies do your laundry well
yeah that you hire somebody to do it and
the idea is if the market is working in
some sense the family starts to fall
apart because you don't need it right
exactly yeah and you know people are
smart they know that like seven eight
years of psychoanalysis is a very tall
price to pay for having your mother come
every week and do your laundry it's an
interest and they'd rather be yeah and
there's this you know whole rhetoric now
about a work-life balance whatever and I
think that the the the the
part of the kind of psycho let's say
like the psychological anima of the
market is that it provides people yet
with a scaffolding and infrastructure
through which to relieve themselves of
their family right so one of the one of
the things that's interesting to me is
is that you're coming from a background
which is very familiar to me where you
have a Jewish Armenian parentage and
your father is a famous mathematician
working in linear programming sort of
optimization science and came up with
this amazing algorithm that changed our
picture for how things could be
optimized using smaller and smaller
ellipsoids right and your mom how did
she figure into this story i my my dad
his whole kind of level of achievement
is way over my head obviously but my mom
and my dad I mean they met when they
were very young and they got married
quite a bit later my mom I think would
probably be very irate and disappointed
if I described her like this because you
know she's gonna listen to this she is
an artist but I who became a housewife
basically okay and I think that she is
the great genius of the family she's the
great kind of organizing and destructive
force in my family lets it just seem
very often in so I have to say that when
we had this lunch which you're
describing as a Power Lunch yeah I drunk
no alcohol I'm not positive that it
qualified what I mean are you supposed
to drink
I don't really know okay my first Power
Lunch oh right I have to it's just you
know a stupid girl bossy hyperbolic term
I have I have to drink okay well very
good milk at all lunches I didn't smoke
you didn't smoke but I'm such a neurotic
I'm so shy I was telling you that I
can't you know I have to constantly
occupy is that because you're reveling
in your neuroticism no no no I'm not
like a Woody Allen person I don't get
off on it oh you sure something that I
hope to shed with a okay the kind of
accumulation of experience like a vision
okay
yeah that's not something I think you
should look up to and yourself I don't
know but yeah I think that my mom is
kind of like a bizarre freewheeling
artistic genius a true eccentric and I
think that I derive a lot of my
personality and my tendency toward
critique from her I mean she's always
spinning paranoid polemics about the
world it's really quite impressive and
she's right most of the time I think
it's very strange that I mean this
really actually echoes your earlier
point that we tend to see accomplishment
only if it shows up in the workplace and
for a lot of us coming from kind of
ethnic families for lack of a better
word very often people who were inside
the home were well known to be the local
genius the eccentric of the life for the
whatever mm-hmm
it was not clear in any way that if you
were the shimano salesman that that was
really the higher expression of the two
people in a marriage hmm and it happens
that your father did something very
creative yes in a very analytic context
yes
hardly surprising like there's nothing
at all surprising to me that your mom
might mostly be at home with the family
and be the major force of the family
yeah and I think like you know my dad
probably gets all the credit for being
kind of the genius um my haters like to
point out that I'm coasting off of my
father's accomplishments which is not
true because I'm actually way more
famous than him on reddit so they're do
yeah there you go he would be so I I'm
here to disgrace my family name but
basically I think that it's a very
interesting this this kind of old
breakdown of my parents marriage is a
very instructive example of the way that
women wield unofficial power through the
domestic sphere again it's like
unofficially the language is even wrong
to me it's like in what world do we not
I guess the idea is that it's official
if it shows up in Wikipedia and it's
unofficial if it only shows up in family
well I think it's official if you're
getting officially compensated for it
right well this is the issue of kin work
that I bring up which is that I think
that a lot of the wage gap work is
extremely weak and manipulative but I
think it's also the case that the real
wage gap is that you have to figure out
how to compensate for kin work you know
taking care of elders relatives or young
children and that you can arguably say
that women should be paid more on
average because that is uncompensated
work and it has to show up somewhere and
sometimes it would show up and like
prestige the matriarch of a large family
is kind of a pretty impressive position
to hold and that with smaller families
it's no longer so cool to be grandma
yeah sure and I think that there's a
general disrespect for the institution
of motherhood let's talk about that what
I tell is that in the culture at large
particularly on the left so that this is
something which I totally resonate with
like when did the left go and they
they're gonna claim oh we're not anti
family but there is some weird anti
family thing um I think that that's
absolutely a kind of collective defense
mechanism because we're talking about
people much like myself who are
Millennials in their late 20s early 30s
you know my father's always used to say
like well Ana you can't really ascend in
class you know contrary to the myth of
the American Dream but you can't really
fall in class either and now we're faced
as a generation that's quite a bit like
the Lost Generation and in Russia my
father's generation all of whom who
drank themselves to death by the age of
you know 52 which is this millennial
generation of people like myself your
dad was two years younger than I am now
when he died of a heart
yes yeah and you know he died in in the
United States but I think that he is
part of the same generational trend what
year was the in 2005 but
there are a lot of people my age who are
confront male and female who are
confronting for the first time the
reality that they will actually fall in
class and especially relative to their
parents
they've never owned property they will
never pay off their student debt they
will never have a safe and dependable
health care situation they will never be
able to afford children and I think the
kind of broadly anti-natal list trend on
the left is a psychological defense
mechanism because you have to reframe I
think in the neoliberal framework you
have to reframe all adversity as
opportunity and what they're saying to
themselves don't be burdened by babies
yeah my breasts will be undeformed by
breastfeed yes I'm a girl boss I don't
need a man I'm an independent strong
independent right so they've had to kind
of rather this will work out for a
minority of the people who claim this to
be true that's not BS which yes is how
broadly this plan is likely yeah how
applicable it is across I mean I started
noticing I actually got a lot of flack
for this and I still don't know why I
started noticing in the pop lyrics of
the last two decades are so kind of
minut shift you can go back as far as
actually the 1960s I remember this
interview with Amy Winehouse where she's
like you know I much I much more prefer
I gravitate toward the music of the 60s
in the 50s 60s whatever as opposed to
the music of the 2000s because in the
kind of female vocalists of the 60s they
expressed kind of a longing a yearning
for companionship and love a desire to
subordinate themselves to the will of
others or something greater than
themselves let's put it that way that
feminists have interpreted as a
fundamentally kind of misogynistic or
sexist outlook whereas now you know with
the coming of somebody like Beyonce you
have these lyrics that literally
like I don't need you I don't need a man
all men are trash I'm gonna keep
stacking my bills and it's it's this
form of feminism the I find to be very
callous and creepiness and ultimately
counterproductive actually I mean let's
take what you just said it was actually
weirdly on both sides of the gender
aisle for example let's say John Denver
when he sings about you know as I kiss
me and smile for me to me that you way
he talks about um when I come back I'll
bring your wedding ring mm-hmm like he's
excited about the fact that he's screwed
up in this relationship he says I played
around and then he says but I realize
how important this is and I'm gonna make
it right and I'm excited about becoming
betrothed to you right I'm gonna make
amends well not only make amends I you
know like when Beyonce I mean just to
connect these two data points she's
saying if you like it you should put a
ring on it like she that's really what
she wanted mm-hmm but like you didn't
you didn't exercise your option is very
transactional mm-hmm
so now I'm up I'm up in the club getting
jiggy with this other guy you shouldn't
be upset yeah yeah sure it's it's it is
a very kind of transactional ethos that
permeates all like there is this like
kind of stupid trend on Twitter were
people or that people were mocking
because other people were tweeting out
kind of empathy templates so you know
somebody texts you and they're like hey
I'm like really going through a hard
time you know I'm having it getting a
divorce my mom is dying of cancer
whatever you fire back with like hey I'm
currently at capacity do you know
somebody else who slash I'm going
through some personal problems to slash
and it's like a kind of prefabricated
template for how you should respond to a
person in need Wow yeah the lucky you're
you're so lucky that all this stuff is
way over your head I have to live with
this every day and it shrinks my will
and libido to live but it
like this kind of thing that is hyper
transactional all relations have become
so transactional all relationship I mean
look my take on this is that all
relationships have an aspect of exchange
great but that what distinguishes the
transactional from the rich relationship
is how many layers of indirection
separate the people involved from the
exchange yes
so dinner in a movie is a lot more
abstract than turning a trick on a
street corner yeah and then you go
further you know with courtship it
becomes incredibly distant in terms of
the number of layers and what we don't
recognize is that those layers of
indirection are essential to a rich life
yeah a new rich emotional life and what
we're dealing with now are people who if
they are not economically impoverished
or spiritually impoverished because they
have no institutions or values on which
to depend okay so this gets me back to
like you're crazy podcast yeah and your
persona so first of all I mean you're
playing with all sorts of associations
and breaking them in ways that the
indicia and the underlying like the
proximate and ultimate are separated so
I normally associate vocal fry' and up
talking with stupidity right I don't
associate it with your level of insight
and commentary right you guys sound
stoned out of your mind and there's a
tremendous amount of vocal fry' but what
it speaks to is this like crazy
metacognitive distance that you and your
co-host have from the topics that you're
discussing and you're sort of you're
constantly be mused by this sort of very
weird period of the human condition is
that wrong um I think I've been used as
a nice way of putting it I think that we
really we're very frustrated what do you
want
I I don't know we're what like all women
we don't know what we want no I mean I
think I want you do know what you want I
think I want I mean
on it on a kind of broad social level I
think that we have to take kind of the
old Nietzschean adage God is dead right
people always interpret that as you know
I think people have a tendency to
interpret it as God is dead and
therefore we can get like weird septum
piercings and tattoos sleeves and go
fucking and sucking and polyamorous
arrangements and that's not at all what
he meant he meant God is dead and no it
is up to secular humanity to replace the
value system that was evacuated with the
death of God with an equally viable one
do you think that's possible no I don't
know but I you know what else can we do
you know Josh always says to me like you
have to stay cheerful in the face of
adversity like the Greeks yeah
well all right so I mean in part and I
don't know how long the show is gonna
get away with it
yeah but ultimately it's about for me
recognizing what the religious impulse
was it was a load-bearing structure of
our civilization because it caused you
to think in intergenerational terms like
in our the shared part of our tradition
the Jewish tradition the concept of
generation to generation goes under the
name the door of a door mm-hmm from
generation to generation and that thing
about you have to be seeing yourself you
have to subordinate and submit and like
this is against the ethos of our time
but it occurs everywhere because our
soma the parts of us that are
non-reproductive are finite they always
die yes and if you do not link yourself
in a chain with others then Rome has to
be built in the day because there's
nothing more for you host as we say well
that was far more elegant yeah that's it
yeah but I I mean it's true and look I
mean investing or kind of honoring
posterity is a means of investing in the
future yeah it's a means of envisioning
yourself in a greater human chain a
human centipede Roger in debauchery no
but
and what's lost now I mean this is like
the the cardinal sin right in kind of
neoliberal discourse is subordinating
your will to somebody else it's bizarre
and to see this kind of ethos and
flourish on the so-called left is
profoundly disputing well it's it's such
a simplistic version of empowerment
yeah and it's it you know it's one of
the things that I've advocated
repeatedly so in terms of I
I'm gonna take your adage and start
repeating myself loudly and Amin I keep
saying that magic happens when people
pass power back and forth if you retain
all your power then you don't get to the
magic of giving your power to somebody
else and having them give you an equal
amount you know of a different kind of
back and so we never actually build
those super powerful relationships when
we're hoarding our power say I'm not
gonna give anything up mm-hmm
you're interested in motherhood like for
yourself for myself of course but in
general yeah I mean I think this is the
most kind of noble honorable institution
on the planet and it really matters I
mean this is one of the things that a
family friend is very dear to me took me
a sigh at some point and said you want
to know something magical look at your
children that's what happens when a PhD
stays home to raise them yeah you know
and it's just like are you getting a
little verklempt that's beautiful I get
do ya I get way too freaked left when
this shows yeah yeah but it's you know
my wife is out of the workforce for like
ten years or something and you know she
came back you know with with with
mentally guns blazing yeah but I think
that this hatred of motherhood has to be
acknowledged first of all it's denied
but we don't hate mother we just think
it's about choice but you look at it and
the mommies who work in the mommies who
don't
hmm one gender is built to reproduce our
species and I just I can't stand what
we've done to it yeah and there's
kind of no honoring also among men or
women of the gender difference which
exists it's very real and palpable and I
think feminists I have this idea that if
we acknowledge that we're different
we're acknowledging that we're unequal
and that's not at all the case we're
differently equal we're it differently
abled well this is the weird thing if
you try to make this argument at the
level of like racial groups or
geographically separated groups there
really isn't a great way of saying that
there should be equality because there's
no reason that separated groups should
have variables having common means
within a group there actually is this
weird principle of a Fisher the
biological theorist hmm which says that
it is as good to be female as male from
the perspective of the fitness of the
two genders of strategy right and the
problem with it is that you have to you
have what fails is what you might call
the Ginger Rogers principle so the old
as the joke goes Ginger Rogers could do
everything Fred Astaire could do but
backwards and in heels
and the feminist version of this is
women are as good or better at
everything men can do except peeing
standing up and that can't possibly be
the case if Fisher's theory is to hold
because then women would simply be
better yes unless peeing standing up was
like the be-all and end-all which I mean
it's good but it's not that's part of
the problem which is if you if you claim
that you're better at something biology
tells you you have to be worse at
something else all right so that there's
a kind of an implicit trade-off right or
balance let's say well then it gets to
this really like here's here let's get
into trouble with psychologists and
psychiatrists okay the whole
codependence concept yes there is
something which is really dysfunctional
but a lot of interdependence is labeled
as codependent hmm and the modern notion
that you should be a completely
functional person who can do everything
and able to walk out on a
elements notice mm-hmm that completely
destroys the concept of coupling yeah I
mean I think this all goes back to the
atomizing logic of the market and all my
big issue I think my big critique kind
of the central organizing theme of my my
work right is this idea that a
progressive activism is now effectively
marching in lockstep with the very
market imperatives that they are opposed
to on the face of things it's Madden in
its sowing it's so intellectually
incoherent it's kind of amazing that
it's still hanging together as a pseudo
philosophy yeah all right so now like I
feel like you're revealed you're somehow
reveling on your podcast and there's
like really dangerous kind of memes
which suggests you know royalty plunged
into boredom and cocaine and and want
and sexuality but in fact underneath it
you're coming from an academic tradition
and you know embracing very traditional
values there's no reason to leave
left-of-center thinking because
traditionally what it what is the left
bin it's been about empowering working
families right and that's what I'm
interested in it's funny that has so
many of my critics and I if you really
look at us it's like you know the
narcissism the narcissism of small
differences like we are completely
indistinguishable to like an Afghani fig
farmer yeah you know 99% of our politics
are equivalent are they I'm sure I mean
like who are you pissing off you know I
think I think people that kind of are
self-identified as leftists but are
basically and I say this with the most
and like the most empathy possible
because I understand their position I
feel completely insecure and precarious
in the market they feel that they have
no future I up until a year or two ago
felt that I have no future it was really
a toss-up okay so he talked what
happened when you got a future I mean I
started this podcast and I know and I
knew what would happen to you did you
have a physiological change
physiological I'm like when I've been
I've been shit out of luck yeah and then
I get some luck
I'm the chemicals that are running
through my body are totally different
yeah I mean you start to even like look
more like resplendent and wonderful and
whatever but you get plumage yeah you
get plumage I think like but this is the
first time in 34 years old I'm kind of
like an old geezer by millennial
achievement standards you know it's like
you have to be like 23 when you peak or
something and eat but again I'm merely
an individual right and there's a whole
generation of people who are like now
left behind you know my friend Peter
teal at all I mean not personally so
he's got a great quote I don't know
whether he said it publicly probably has
but he says things to me and I just I
kick myself for not having thought of
them first
he says the boomers golden era is in his
or her 20s a Gen Xers in his or her 50s
and then he looks at me and he says and
we're just getting started it's been
it's like I didn't get suddenly
interesting like in the last few years
because I ate a mushroom yeah it was
there's this thing I've called the
distributed idea suppression complex or
the disc is this you're acquainted yeah
quite a lot oh yeah yeah but then the
weird thing is you watch it in the world
and it it only works if you're coining
something that people actually recognize
is real it's not like you can make up
anything in it it just goes but there is
this thing that tried to suppress all
ideas still working like they're trying
to make Andrew yang not appear on MSNBC
on any of the graphics or LC gets you
know dropped at every opportunity
yeah this thing just doesn't want to
hear that there's a massive
intergenerational transfer where the two
vampiric generations of the silence and
the boomers transfuse the Xers and the
Millennials
in order to allow them to live in the
style to which they become accustomed
and like the most obvious place that you
see this is the university system
explain that oh it's named here a man
that was a pyramid scheme that was
expanding mm-hmm and when when the
growth that was natural the system ran
out the there was no way to give people
professorships who had been contributing
their youth to the research of those
above them and so what the universities
did almost every top university loaded
up on administrators and then made
tuition insanely expensive it made it
impossible to get rid of the debt in
bankruptcy so that you can die you know
getting a Social Security check and
still paying your student loans mm-hmm
I'm gonna do a show hopefully with sugar
baby University which is a program
inside of seeking arrangement sugar
dating okay where it would appear that
the appeal is that young women who are
and some men burdened with student debt
can graduate debt-free by dating older
successful people and getting an
allowance everyone which i think is just
like it's weird to imagine a generation
sort of selling its daughters into
borderline commercial sex work yeah I
mean it's monsterous and the idea that
you would institutionalize this well
it's like a degree it's like the
university fuckers why don't you get a
why don't you get a job bussing tables
to pay off your student loans when
student tuition has gone you know above
medical tuition which is above regular -
regular inflation I'm sorry medical
inflation is above regular inflation and
tuition inflation is above medical
mm-hmm the whole thing is mad but the
system couldn't be kept together right
and so that is an intergenerational
transfusing yeah I mean look one of the
most one of the biggest rackets in this
country after management consulting is
the idea that all people should go to
college
I think Germany has it right they send
most of them to vocational programs yeah
the idea that you should even be paying
you know forty thousand dollars a
semester in tuition to get a
communications degree as a super senior
for five years is
fosters nobody needs to be saddled huh
you're gonna blow it for these
generations yeah why because since the
scare man they turned the most amazing
part of our of our country into this
wealth transfer scam it's just it's
funny but it's painful yeah I mean it's
and it's horrible I was thinking about
you know the kind of the idea of the you
are you familiar with this concept
Stubbe
the Russian parody you show my special
ass - ups - up we can get into this
later because it's a whole don't know it
it's I think that this is like to really
understand the Trump era for example you
have to view it through this particular
lens we'll give it to me it's a it's a
late Soviet parody genre or style that
involves an over identification so
extreme that it's unclear whether you're
endorsing authentically endorsing a
position or perpetuating an elaborate
role okay so it's basically a post
ironic gesture if you look at like the
Golden Age of liberal entertainment as
you know Jon Stewart The Daily Show
right which was kind of characterized by
this is a really long-winded I crush and
I didn't mean to go here drink up yeah
yeah I'll keep going as characterized by
you know this kind of snarky implicitly
morals morally superior ironic posture
right that was I think supplanted
eventually by this kind of stew up over
identification right where it's unclear
for example with people like me and
Dasha it's unclear what position were
actually endorsing right and Trump for
example is the master of the strategy
and so he plays we do we both
acknowledge the Trump has some crazy
genius to him I think he's a total
genius but I think that he's an artistic
genius not a political gene J'son
artistic I think that he's an artist
he's a Gemini just like my mother my mom
hates Trump with like a
because they're the same person down to
the kind of miserable Conti expression
they kind of mo when they're in a
irritated mood its release how is that
Con Thien huh how was that content Conti
on Conti kunti am i okay
but I'm very colorful which is why i'm
not a troll' but you take somebody like
trump the guy is so over invested in
performing his own and confidence that
any parody of him by an outsider reads
as cringy and over determined which is
why SNL has sucked for the last well in
part you have to get something right
before you compare it it right yeah and
I don't know if you ever saw this video
I think it's called something like and
not it because of the music in the hall
of the trumpian King no okay so it's all
of these liberal comedians from this
golden era that you're talking about in
the most knowing and oppressive way
possible saying but you're not gonna win
come on we all know it and everyone's
saying like oh please run mmm Oh it'll
be so entertaining like there's no
concept that this is real yes yeah and
yeah every single one of those people
who appeared on this including John
Oliver and Stephen Colbert became
unfunny to me in just about everything
that they did after they went so over
the top I momentarily uh that they
showed that they didn't understand like
you can't mock this stuff and what a
betrayal like on a Freudian level what a
collective betrayal
you know parental authority that was we
really believed he's these guys that
they could be that they could parse like
sorry I believed in them they yep
because but this is this thing I've
called the gated institutional narrative
it was protected against reality I mean
I know whether because of their you have
to publish like a coffee table book of
you're like coinages and neologisms
I'd rather you make fun of them here
that could actually be fun yeah one of
the things that is again this is this
shows you how twisted my soul is but as
a
last time I sometimes watch the last
days of the Cheska's and Romania huh
because like right up until the end
pornhub and Google yeah execution right
your Slavic milk yeah it's it's very
much like there's a rally and somehow
the rally goes out of control mm-hmm and
order has to be restored and the cameras
have to break the filming of what's
going on and so right at the end they've
got their shrinking group of loyalists
we're still terrified that these people
are going to you know regain power
because that's the way it's always been
but everywhere the spell is broken
mm-hmm and I guess that's sort of what I
saw is that this thing was just it was
an American version of propaganda that
had been so believed that when it
started not to be true the organs just
kept pumping out all of this
encouragement that you know think
Hillary is going to win there's no
question she's inevitable I mean even
now they're running you know Kamal is
out so they're really going whole hog
with boo to judge but it's yeah there's
a certain there's a certain lag between
the progressive and trumpian and between
kind of like traditional Democrats and
conservatives and the Trump
administration and I think like Trump
uniquely among world leaders possibly in
the history of the world has been able
to do this thing I mean I wrote a whole
essay about it he was he was able to do
what the Russian avant-garde and this
the the socialist realists had been
trying to do these two kind of a
sequential propaganda like arms of the
culture industry in the Soviet Union
which was maintained it which is achieve
a total synthesis of the material and
the imaginable or the imaginative what
you know
sounds really good slow down and give it
to me I mean what you know it's kind of
like the typical like Soviet avant-garde
idea that we were creating a total
synthesis of art in life like a single
kind of art political project and Trump
alone has been able to do this though
crucially under a very capitalist not
communist regime he's been able to marry
what we it can I met like what we
imagine and what is materially possible
yeah he's been very ineffective in
bringing in an entire like there is no
theory of Trump yeah because almost no
one either on his side or in the
opposition side actually understands how
much method he brings and it's cryptic
so it looks you know it's a lot of
indirection he understands and ER he
does but he's got these formulas that I
can't tell you how bizarre it is I mean
you probably know my friend Sam Harris
it was sitting here and we were having
this argument
mm-hm friendly but an argument in the
less rub the seat for good luck well
rich stuff is that been in that chair as
joe rogan ever sat in the seat not yet I
have a crush on Joe Rogan I know he's
married but I think everyone yeah I
think that he really could be the guy
who could run and win against Trump he
does not want me to talk about this okay
okay you bring no because he's not it
he's got a great life yeah and the fact
that everybody loves him causes people
to sort of do weird things in his
present he just wants to be a regular
guy he's also you know and I don't mind
saying this behind Joe yeah yeah that he
is not oh yeah yeah I mean he's running
an incredible operation but whatever it
is there's a lot of method there because
if you think about how difficult it is
to turn these shows out and to keep them
fresh it's almost impossible so there's
a ton of genius going on in Joe's front
he has not come yet but he we agreed to
do each other's podcast
what Sam did was to say that he Sam
thought that Trump was the evil Chauncey
Gardiner that that was his theory of
mine and I thought that is insane I mean
it's not that Sam and I tried to have it
out we can't see each other's point
mm-hmm I'm not saying that Sam is wrong
but I see so much method to trumps
trolling and he doesn't he thinks that
this is all kind of like well I think
what he does you know another thing I
say is is that Sam is more focused on
honesty and I'm more focused on meta
honesty Trump is not an honest person
but in a weird way he is meta honest
right so he's right when he says he's an
artist on a personal level he is yeah
yeah so but what we care about is that
like for example Trump knows the the
liberal mind is automated and as soon as
you break through one of its shibboleths
it has an automated non-thinking
reflexive reaction and he can map that
and then you can say okay I'll do
something that will cause the reflexive
reaction but I will put something in
place which is totally different so that
when you have that reflexive reaction
you will be shown to be not an npc
mm-hmm well what's it am I am I allowed
to look at my phone there is that
hilarious tweet I will stall for you no
that's okay I don't even have to but the
I have to look at my phone every ten
minutes or else I die there is that
tweet that he had today about Greta Thun
Berg and how she needs to get her like
anger issues under control she is
hilarious it's so wrong but it's so I
mean the man has like the Midas touch
when it comes to Twitter but I didn't
talk about that let's talk about that
tweet you know so Greta is this
self-described
autistic girl who's mad as hell about
climate and who is being even if she has
authenticity to her there's an entirely
inauthentic complex that has settled her
on her wants to use her the way the
World Wildlife Federation used the panda
bear as charismatic megafauna
so in some sense Greta the actual human
is also the charismatic megaphone
of a propaganda campaign which is lying
in order to probably tell the truth so
you've got this real climate emergency
yes you should be able to do a truthful
campaign but that can't work so you have
to do a lying campaign and you use an
actual human being as your mascot so
it's like layers and layers of confusion
right and the idea of course is that you
can't attack an autistic child
particularly female 1 yeah and because
she's angry and so Trump's Trump sees
opportunity yes and he's gonna go at the
lair where he's gonna say she has anger
management issues she should get it
under control go to an old-fashioned
movie with friends and then he uses
chill greta chill yeah we're chill is
both an admonition in terms of chill out
but also a reference to global cooling
right yeah and you know and also keep in
mind all of this just days after on the
heels of the Pamela Carlin remark about
Baron Trump that prompted Melania to
tweet and her little baby daddy voice
did not talk to my minor son that's the
way you know I love and I've read
everything in her like sexy baby voice
yeah and so ok so by the way I'm so
jealous because I can't say anything
like that yeah as you have the XX going
yeah get away with murder
yeah the XX and like advanced what's it
called like wet brain like years of
being a Russian alcohol but it's you
know ok so this woman who's a like a
state witness for the the impeachment
proceedings insult ostensibly insults
Trump's kid and that's not kosher but he
can insult a 16 year old climate change
a little bit this is this this whole
thing so if you look at how complex this
this troll is he is appealing to all of
the people who see the manipulation of
the real Greta right for this fake
campaign which in my opinion is actually
crowding out the real Kane
pain that should be there because
climate is an issue but it's miss
portrayed because it has to be done in a
simplistic fashion yes you've got like
millions of layers there and Trump is
finding his support in the people who
see through part of it yes okay the
other thing is is that he does have this
thing where he knows that because his
own child has been brought in as a
combatant that he should be allowed to
do something like yes and be able to use
somebody else's child as a human shield
well particularly one yeah being pushed
forward by time as Person of the Year
yes so oh god are we there yet over
there okay happened oh I felt Lizza was
the person of the year I thought was
Greta oh I don't know they should just
mud Russell and get it over with anyway
going okay so in any event that was a
perfect version of this isn't Trump the
child
this is Trump the master strategist
that's a trap mm-hmm because the liberal
or left-of-center mind just says whoa
Trump attacked an autistic yeah and if
that was the simplicity of it they'd be
right mm-hmm and it's in no way shape or
form the sub-array
right but he's he's really kind of a
genius at doing that and it's so sad
that he there is no avant-garde art it's
I mean I said this on my podcast the
avant-garde are today is the sum of the
Trump PR teams social media output and
coupled with the kind of unintentional
comic fallout of woke ad campaigns well
for example you use the word retarded
yes if I were to say I'm really offended
I have a developmentally challenged
relative you might respond oh I don't
think retarded people are retarded Yeah
right and they wouldn't understand that
it's a comment on an overloaded term
right well it's a it's a commentary it's
a critique it's a mockery of people who
disingenuously oppose the use of the
word it's not actually a commentary or a
mockery
actually we'll see there was a reason I
mean as somebody who developmentally
struggled in school hmm
I have a certain we're talking I was
like are you talking about you me me you
don't know me you can't judge me anyway
go on as somebody who struggled in
school I'm I I have some sensitivity
right okay like being you know having
somebody say like if they see my
handwriting you say like are you are you
a an axe murderer you know is what's
your handwriting I'm it doesn't look
like anything okay it looks like Jackson
Pollock it looks like prisoner scrolls
yeah yeah well I love that Trump's
handwriting by the way he's very bubbly
and girlish you can almost see him
during the heart above the I didn't a
school yeah it's very very like angular
and so yeah yeah but I can see how it
started mm-hmm but then it became like
the language police and it's completely
out of control
yeah I mean look and I object to being I
resent being policed by people who were
guilty of the same crime you know just
like 18 months ago or whatever yeah I
resent in general not people but how the
culture the system or whatever you want
to call it
has become so callous so transactional
so interested in meeting out kind of
punitive justice and so incapable of
giving people the benefit of the doubt
there's no largesse of spirit nobody
believes that anything anybody does
anything out of like humor or should we
saw incentive or well because it meant
in many ways it's become like a
scavenger hunt where you have to collect
do you have the head of a racist you
have the head of a misogynist you have
the head of yeah an anti-semite and so
you know and then you get bingo if you
call out all those yeah yeah so
partially it's a reward structure I
think one of the ways which it was
called out and I hate that term but
there you are really well by Joe is that
he had a he was I watched him work up a
routine over several nights on wrestling
is gay and he started
with wrestling is really gay and because
gay is an epithet in some cases people
that made the association ok wrestling
is stupid mm-hmm it's not what he said
he said wrestling is gay so they they
take the bait this is a very trumpian
but this is Joe doing it as a comedy
right and he says whoa whoa whoa whoa
whoa you just completed that in your
mind yeah I didn't say what you think I
said and then and then now you're now
like you're in the pitcher plant or the
Venus flytrap is closed and he says
let's think about this you got two guys
in gold shorts with lace-up booties
rolling around having some wet bodies
together yeah
if this isn't gay what is mm-hmm
well when he starts doing it that way
you realize that you took the bait you
know you had an automated reaction as
opposed to a thoughtful mm-hmm and that
shows off the comics skill by laying the
trap I mean you saw another one of these
with Dave Chappelle where he says I'm
gonna do an impression of the audience
and the audience is insufferable no he
says I'm gonna do an impression I'm
gonna ruin your life and I'm gonna make
it impossible for you to earn a living
and like people thought it was Trump and
they says no it's you mm-hmm
so the fourth wall is broken the finger
is pointing yeah I mean look and that's
on some level I feel like I shouldn't be
fully confessional because that'll take
away some of the allure and the mystique
but this is what I do with my Twitter I
set things up in such a way that people
always inevitably take the bait and it's
not because I think people don't watch
this program don't worry yeah that they
don't yeah and this is true and the
thing that that's so kind of it's
eternally amusing and yet disheartening
my aunt my only goal you know now that
I'm like a glass of red deep is to get
people to think and to draw their own
conclusions and went but when they do
think this is why you know democracy on
some level isn't possible when they do
now we're getting into the ASMR portion
this now this sounds like my iPod
Kaster like pouring popping bottles
pouring wine I'm gonna light up in this
studio just kidding
but when people do kind of get their
little engines of turning they always
somehow are the people that I'm used to
dealing with it anyway always somehow
draw the worst possible least mutually
flattering conclusion that speaks
volumes about where the culture at large
is that but when you look at yourself
metacognitively mm-hmm okay
I have this thing I called the robot
which is the thing that I observe making
these automated decisions and then I
have another thing I call the
metacognitive perch where I watch my
robotic self I'm just horrified right by
what it makes how it conducts itself I
see you as having this distance as an
intrinsic part of your personality and
the person I'm talking to is really
sitting on the metacognitive perch yeah
I mean but this is the the kind of
blessing and burden of being a
dysfunctional traumatised Russian person
it sucks being Russian you you seeking
you know you see the chessboard yeah
which is a it's more of a burden than it
is a blessing because you it makes life
very difficult to live I see more you
know I sympathize with people like Bret
Easton Ellis and Michelle Welbeck where
my two favorite novelists people laugh
because I'm not reading like flow Barre
Balzac but because they have there they
have this metacognitive perch they're
they're books are about meta-commentary
it's social commentary disguised as
fiction which to me is kind of the most
elite form of writing well Brett you
know so Brett sat in your chair and we
talked about this issue that I had
accused him of privatizing our mutual
childhood since we came from the same
milieu okay and he talked about the
importance of the narrator his clay in
less than zero
whose detached from the horrors of what
he's seeing he's weirdly drawn yes just
the way we are to look at an auto
accident but he's also just clinically
kind of detailing well this is what
happened
hmm and you know somehow I brought up
Joan Didion mm-hmm in that session and
he confessed that this was his favorite
author and I think about her detachment
where she was watching the sort of 60s
debauchery and he was watching the 70s
debauchery all right and just the sense
of having a traditional sensibility
viewing the destruction of traditional
like eat you can see that this is a very
long unraveling of the fabric of society
yeah and that's I mean that's my beef
with all these critiques of Welbeck
right
the primary one being that he's kind of
a nihilist and and a misogynist and in
my mind especially at this new book
serotonin which I don't know if you've
read but if you haven't you should read
it it's just a you know they ate a giant
eulogy for the decline of Western
civilization and the moral failure of
liberal consensus but the main question
the kind of principled organizing theme
of his work in my mind has always been
is love possible under advanced
capitalism what kind of nihilist is that
that concerns himself with a question is
meaningful and significant as the
possibility the question of love why do
you think that comes up what but in
order for that book to be interesting
that question has to be interesting
right what makes that question
interesting whether love is possible
under advanced capitalism I know if I
said is is transportation by automobile
possible under advanced capitalism it
wouldn't be an interesting question
right so why is it even a question is
love possible because I think oh you
know vast
a significant majority of people at
least people who are kind of in kind of
inoculated into some sort of
intellectual society or professional
society professional class believe that
it's not or suspect that it's not well
but what is it and I if I were to ask
you what's going you know I suspect that
they actually want it to be true that
love is not possible under advanced
capitalism because then that offloads
their own say in the matter their own
responsibility to the system or whatever
if I asked our novels possible to read
like our great novels possible to read
in the age of Twitter
I'm sure yeah they're possible to read I
don't know that they're possible to
write or to feel alright I'm not
positive that they are many of us have
noticed a bizarre inability to plunge
into a book we think of ourselves as
book people right but we don't we feel
that our brains have been rewired much
the way porn has changed the way in
which we find our lovers I think that
Twitter has changed the way we find our
novels right on some level yeah I mean
there's no there's no longer a need or I
don't know about a desire but there's no
longer kind of a necessity for a long
for a work of art that has a long-form
expository narrative structure
I totally disagree you think that I mean
I think most people don't sense that
television got so weirdly good and it
nobody was expecting that right but TV
came out of nowhere
modern TV has longer narrative arcs than
any movie yes because the movie industry
was completely eroded right because The
Sopranos and Mad Men and all that
figured out something we didn't
understand yeah but I think TV is also
like watching is meaningfully different
from reading well I guess what I'm
trying to say is
that if you think about this from an
evolutionary perspective there's kind of
an adaptive landscape for various forms
of memetic dissemination of story
narrative information and some of them
have gotten terrible but like if you if
you looked at 1970s television mm-hmm I
went back to look at The Love Boat from
my youth
it's unwatchable right and I mean
imagine what Game of Thrones is weirdly
strangely compelling yes it is yeah and
the way in which movies like there was
just this transfer of wealth from cinema
into the idiot box and that's
fascinating because everything else
tells us our long-form podcasting is a
very strange parallel structure where
our attention spans getting really long
they are getting long somewhere
somewhere yeah it's being transferred I
mean you know I had this thought earlier
today in my hungover state where it
dawned on me I had a little bit of a
kind of like a feminine imposter
syndrome moment and I was like this is
ridiculous that I'm like going on this
guy's podcast I'm some hostess from
Bushwick you know and then I'm fuck is
mine yeah and I was like you know that's
retarded it's gay or whatever it's all
this kind of bevy of ridiculous words is
completely by the way to all the
advertisers who just left the program
it's been a great run yeah but then I
think about it and I see that with
podcasting there is the possibility of a
revival of the era of the public
intellectual which is something that
people crave also like the new class
undignified as it sounds the new class
of like podcasting personas or possibly
will possibly be able to revive
something like that image or social role
which is important I think what I think
you could also look at this a little bit
like William Tell or you know Philip
petit walking the tightrope between the
Twin Towers part of what makes long-form
podcasting
citing is the idea that we could screw
up at any moment and destroy our names
and reputations and I think that that
should I do it for you know I can we
started I'm yeah I'm a little wind-up
now is that right yeah yeah that will be
BC you're a vice signal huh you said
this to me during our Power Lunch you
have to re I say this to the audience no
hint of sarcasm I really like when men
mansplain things to me I think that it's
fun and cool so vice signalling I think
more people are talking about it now but
I originally started talking about it
because it came out of a theory for me
of contract bridge where you have to say
what it is you're going to do and then
you're judged by whether or not you
accomplished that which you said you
were gonna do okay so what I view modern
society is being is a game in which
you're fitted with a white suit that you
did not ask for and then the key
question is do you keep it clean or does
it become soiled right okay well my
first belief is you're crazy
to accept a white suit because that's
not gonna work out one way so I picked
this dan Bilzerian as my example and
your fellow armenian other fellow
armenian yeah so his thing is guns drugs
an automatic weapon huh and that sin
don't forget money don't forget the hose
sorry sorry guns i said it's the wine
yeah girls yeah guns yeah and drugs and
money cuz those are is for a big thing
yeah you can't embarrass him by saying
hey you just took a bunch of chicks out
into the desert and gave them automatic
weapons after you cooked them up yeah
or gave them weed because like yes
that's my business model huh and as a
result there's no industry trying to
take down dan Bilzerian right i mean i
mean i think i said this too i don't
remember because i was wind up then - i
said you know it's the same thing with
somebody like Howard Stern or not
Trump they never promised to respect
women so they can't get taken down for
not respecting women meanwhile all these
guys who were playing like the virtue
game get at least they at least get
their reputations tarnished the two
cases that you talked about Howard
Stern's original gambit was that he
wanted to be lashed to the mast and be
surrounded by TNA and just as much
cleavage as was possible and then he
would do nothing mm-hmm
and so that was his that was his game
was that he was Ulysses and so it was a
promise uh-huh and he was married
throughout and then his wife would call
up while he was surrounded by temptation
yeah in the case of Bilzerian he's got a
different promise the promise is I will
not lie to you and you will not lie to
me I'm not telling you that you have to
be monogamous with me I'm not telling
you any one of a number of things I will
be straight with you
you will be straight with me and if we
can't have honesty then you have to
leave okay so those are incredibly weird
gambits you have to give both of these
men their do it's their very unusual
right there socially engineering
something well my favorite dan Bilzerian
post on instagram is he's there I think
with no shirt because he's also kind of
a confection he serves himself up as he
selfish yeah yeah and he's reaching out
to this woman who's more clothes than he
is to come up a step somewhere in Greece
yeah and the caption is come with me
I'll ruin your life but you'll have fun
right and like I really think that's his
proposition yeah I I really have to hand
it Armenian men because they alone among
men are just as vain as women are they
yeah they really like to have ejected
them selves well but you see in my
opinion women are really the male's of
the human species because as the
enduring has the adorned gender no no
you you are now echoing a thesis
proposed by this woman Andrea long true
was like a transgender
who was also echoing Valerie Solanas who
made who has the same hypothesis that's
interesting to hear Eric why you say
Weinstein Weinstein yeah I think the
Power Move the Power Move Eric may say
so is to have Harvey on in this chair no
no you can't no well no I mean there are
there are people who've been cancelled
mm-hmm who I'm interested in right and
there are people who have been canceled
I'm perfectly happy that they are yeah
and this is part of the part of my
problem which is that well I mean this
is a difference between us yeah which is
the way I view it mmm is is that you
have accepted the game but you're gonna
behave really badly within it right I
haven't accepted the game yeah I've
rejected the game okay and I understand
the motivations for how this woke stuff
got started huh and I'm sympathetic with
them to a point and I'm completely
unsympathetic with how non
self-reflective and shallow and
mean-spirited it is well pretending that
it cares and I'm gonna carry that
tension so you and I are in slightly
different missions yeah yeah you're
gonna carry the tension of I'm okay
being earnest like my answer my answer
to your Nietzsche point okay is around
you so for example you know this is a
three dimensional projection of a four
dimensional convex polytope okay and I
find it transcendent uh-huh so I'm
holding up and what is this 120 cell
which is the name of the convex polytope
which is a generalization of the
dodecahedron to four-dimensional space
mm-hmm
and you have one over there that yes the
24 sites Dan which is a unique one that
doesn't correspond to one of the
Platonic solids right I look at that one
by you mm-hmm and I just marvel at it
and I think about it the way people
think about like Seraphim yeah it's like
I don't have religion in my life at the
same level that my ancestors did
right but you have some but I have I
have the the one
mathematics and physics and biology
mm-hmm that that plugs the same religion
shaped hole in my soul yeah so that's
how I've solved the Nietzsche problem
that's why I remain earnest much to the
chagrin of some of my listeners I know
but I think I actually think that we're
fundamentally at the end of the day on
the same page about that I think we're
very close to being and I think this is
one of the reasons why I covertly
brought up your father because this III
think that the Jewish and the Soviet and
the Armenian you know all of these
things these are very old tradition that
feel very deeply and they were naked
about caring right and I guess we're
actually we're back to where we started
it's in a car off baby but the there's
this idea I think the kind of in America
there's this very reductive idea of like
white people right white people there's
there are all these different non-white
ethnicities and cultures but white
people are a singular block through the
magic of this country only right but
I've but you know I mean I don't know if
you have the similar kind of experience
I've always felt for example very
alienated from a Nordic non-jewish
whites right or just to give you an
example right I don't you know have any
beef with them but those people are not
my people and so you think that and then
one of my largest constituencies abroad
are Sweden in Norway your demos yeah
that makes sense because they're they're
also actually very earnest people and
they're also weirdly having their
idealism that has worked very well and
as in fact yes got it out by the left
abused against them so that they are now
starting to feel like WTF mmm-hmm why
can't we talk about some of the tensions
that were experiencing there is
something that it means to be Swedish or
Norwegian or Icelandic right and to be
told well this your identity is just
that your European and even that is only
like this whole question about software
nationalism
versus hardware nationalism you have
lots of people in the UK for example
from South Asia who by going through the
Oxbridge system sound entirely like the
British upper crust exactly uh and and
further bidden sometimes they come from
the high caste that the British favoured
working with in India Pakistan now the
idea that Enlightenment ideas or
anglo-saxon ideas can run on any
hardware it's like boot camp where
you've got an apple machine it's running
Windows you know I don't really care too
much about the hardware I care a great
deal about the software mm-hmm and the
idea that everybody of European descent
or who are interested in European
cultures should apologize I'm having
none of this I mean there's so much
music and science and architecture and
you know that all the terrible things
that happen to I will not have that
watered down that's an authentic
experience of the thing that bothers me
about it is and then this is another one
of my riffs you have this problem with
vanilla where vanilla has two meanings
mmm one is boring flavorless okay bland
and the other is like the most flavorful
of spices okay and flavorings and
tannins and somehow they're both vanilla
well white is the same thing White is
the most bland boring it's like a canvas
that has been gesso but not painted upon
on the other hand if you look at
European culture is there anything
richer and spicier and more intricate in
interest and somehow our minds are just
bananas over these two you know I mean
it's but it's so it's very offensively
reductive on a way that personally
strikes me because it's kind of the only
thing keeping me from being becoming
like a typical Welbeck Ian protagonist
or one of these like horrible millennial
girl bosses who's fundamentally empty
inside is the great deal of kind of like
honor and respect
that I feel for my ancestors and the
cultural kind of the amniotic fluid that
we all came at well but it's worse I
mean you're in a very funny position you
are culturally like your podcast is
called Redskin yeah and you are
culturally very Russian Soviet Jewish
Armenian but if you really look at it
you can see that it's fading yeah and
you're not going to have grandchildren
that relate to you yeah and that's
that's really a terrifying thing and
it's actually terrifying thing on two
levels because right hey you're not
gonna have grandchildren who relate to
you on like a practicable level but B to
even acknowledge that you want
grandchildren to relate to you kind of
flies in the face of this very leftist
doxy the culture is relevant and it
makes me think of like you know the idea
of narcissism that somebody like lash
was so kind of brilliant identifying
diagnosing and at the time he was
writing in the 60s and 70s he billed it
as kind of the generational pathology of
our time the kind of liberated persona
but even at that time narcissism was
still at the very least a system of
positive affinities so you identified
through affinity right originally maybe
you identified with your ethnicity or
your religion and then later you came to
identify with your lifestyle markers you
know you did yoga or composting or
recycling or whatever and gradually over
time that's yielded to kind of a
negative narcissism were people at large
identify with their oppression in their
adversity but Russians identify with
their oppression and their adversity in
a very strong way that doesn't look
anything like what we're doing in the US
okay see I've never
this one before you oh really
yeah I just thought we were kind of
miserable melancholic people I think
there's a general kind of you know on
the pavlova the great Russian ballerina
said that the Russian soul was marked by
melancholy yeah yeah I think that it's
well you know the it's very interesting
I when I had Garry Kasparov on the
program mm-hmm
he there was some very odd moments mhm
so I tried to do a an intro in Russian
where I said that he was unclear that he
was if he was Garry Kasparov or Garry
Weinstein because that was a very first
name and he immediately just didn't buy
it on yeah I'm jealous that you didn't
do the Russian language intro for me
really my chopped liver just kidding no
go on
okay well I felt that in order well I
mean actually didn't even talk about
almost no one reacted to yeah I am one
of my hopes was for the program was to
start personalizing it to all of the
cultures that I cared the most about and
so I did this thing about us photos in
the video I've divided to you because in
the Moscow Subway's in the subways of
other cities there's this thing which
says you know warning doors are closing
the next stop sluttiest dunces yeah
Heathrow but you know that yeah that
thing I always thought it'd be cool that
the portal was like the Moscow doors huh
opening and closing and he just didn't
react at all to it the one weird thing
where there was like a shiver of
recognition was I talked about the
Russian satirical magazine crocodile and
how descent and irreverence existed
within the Soviet Union but in this very
specified way so that there was a valve
to let things to let off steam and it
wasn't the American picture where nobody
could say anything at any time because
that would never work mmm the Russian
system was much more sophisticated right
and that was the one moment at which he
sort of gave me a little bit of a nod
like wow you really know your stuff
and the thing is is very hard for an
American to connect to the broad Slavic
soul yeah and for us to connect to the
broad American soul I think I said this
to you you know the kind of idea that
Russians are basically optimists
masquerading as cynics and Americans or
cynics masquerading as optimists I mean
that's like broadly on some level like
stereotypically true and I also remember
saying that
Russians unlike Americans you know if
you have a classroom of American kids
and you ask them like who's done X or
who is y the hand shoot up because in
America it's much much less dangerous
historically to identify yourself and
Russians are in the business of
indirection mid fashioned non
identification because it was at some
point a political problem that had a
material real-world consequences but has
been handed down to successive
generations as a behavioural quirk
that's actually really problematic if
you're trying to have like a you know a
romantic relationship with like an
American man for example but yeah work
very weird damaged people I mean I said
this I tweeted about this that
conversation with Kasparov was really
weird because it was like an insight
into all of my communication impasses
with American people say more about that
well in to the degree that I don't like
to disclose or identify myself right I
like to misdirect by saying a great deal
of stuff that seems kind of
superficially very confessional and
personal but actually nobody knows
anything about me people know a lot more
about you than you think they know yeah
but only through kind of a nonverbal or
subconscious means I think that's right
yeah not through anything that exists on
the verbal registers well the you know I
don't know how many podcasts you've done
like this too probably none probably
yeah and I do think that you're gonna
find that your mystique
coexists with your revelation they're
not as rival risks as you might imagine
yeah that's that's possibly a good point
but I think like but what did you hear
and then cast like so you see listened
to that podcast yeah well we famously
tried to talk over each other he's very
forceful right I would like to think
that I've been far less forceful with
you than I was with him yeah but I'm
also easier to get along with
why have you is potentially more
dangerous yeah but that's only because
I'm a woman it cuz Favre and I have the
same ethnic breakdown basically which in
Russia is called grim muchos miss you
much isthmus explosive mixture so it's
like a binary weapon that one it's not
dynamite
yeah it'd be kind of like when Armenians
and Jews join forces right in a single
person it's basically an incredibly
difficult combative categorical
personality and I think that's probably
what he he is I mean I don't know a ton
about him but I'm kind of obviously
interested because you cheated of his
meaning because there's something about
the fact that Putin to him is this
unrecognized master Menace and that
we're running a clown show well the fate
of the world spins out of control he is
very much of a cult I mean I have much
more of a Cold War overlay in my mind
than most of my contemporaries and
certainly my millennial audience I can't
believe that we have nuclear weapons
that they haven't been used in a long
time and that we imagine that this will
go on forever and the third laying kind
of dormant for now I mean but this
brings me back to the whole concept of
stove which dovetails very nicely with
the idea of hyper and normalization
right which the documentarian Adam
Curtis took the title for his famous
documentary from this term which was
coined by this guy Alexei you're Chuck
you're Chuck who's a anthropology
professor who did a lot of kind of
research on Straub with this guy Dominic
Boyer
fellow anthropologist and I guess the
basic principle of hyper normalization
as I understand it in my feeble female
brain is that you know there was kind of
an elite guild of experts technologists
financed ears politicians who kind of if
not conspired and agreed to invent kind
of a fake world atop the real world that
we inhabit because the real world had
grown so complicated that it was that
they had to model it into you know in
simplified terms it's almost like fast
benders were old on a wire we're living
in like a success of a nesting doll of
like successive simulation lost you yeah
matryoshka and I forgot what we were
going where we were going with this but
we we now live in this like kind of like
a hypertrophied hyper real reality where
you know you said to me it's like very
few people can see that they're part of
the simulation I don't know if I
actually agree with that because I like
to think that people are a lot smarter
than we give them credit for it well see
I don't think it comes in too smart a
thing it comes down to our self blinding
yeah and so one of the reasons I was
asking you what you had heard in the
Garry Kasparov podcast was I wasn't sure
what happened during it I think that he
I mean I don't know if you want me to
psychoanalyze this is like a very meta
podcasting we've got pretty mad yeah I
think that he was deflecting your
earnest attempts a mutual identification
which is like the basis of all kind of
bonds right I'm so excited right when I
meet um kind of a fellow travel in any
capacity itself with me and I told you
this during our lunch I was like oh my
god were like you know relatives right
there's something very familiar no never
met you twice yeah and there's something
very familiar in meeting other people
from a kind of a similar cultural
background and I tend to collect them
and
you know if that's racist let me know
that's very but so I think the Russian
tendency which I tried to for example
minimize mitigate and myself to adapt
better to American society is to deflect
any such attempts and to kind of not to
not give anybody an inch to not let
anybody get to know you and to stay kind
of distant are you open to being the
unreliable narrator I'm not sure what
that question means well sometimes like
I forget maybe if it's Edgar Allan Poe's
tell-tale heart where you're telling a
story about the self and the story
reveals something to the audience maybe
Captain queeg and then Caine Mutiny
would be a better example we're talking
about the strawberries and the men
really is discussing his own paranoia in
a way that's leaking out into the
testimony I'm hearing so what I see with
you is that you are Russian post-soviet
enough yeah but that you're very worried
that it's not really a sustaining
quality in this homogenizing see like
your mother you can see there's no way
she can get away from it I have never
met the woman but I can feel her her
presence as being intrinsically Soviet
and your podcast is called Red Scare but
first of all that's a an invocation of
like the 1950s or earlier
yeah and menstruation administration
into the thong and there's a tramp stamp
and hmm you know there's this whole
aspect of you're worried that you can't
actually keep it together you can't hold
the information back you can't keep the
identification with Eastern Europe
because it's starting to fray yeah on
some level but also on another level I
feel kind of like a complete dinosaur
I'm relatively young I'm young ish but I
feel like that sometimes I feel kind of
insane right because I'm the only one
who has in my you know circle for
example has kind of an attachment
descent to certain religious or ethnic I
took an Ivy League admission at the
University of Pennsylvania and when
everyone else went into Investment
Banking or law or medicine I went to
math grad school like your father
because there was something ancient
about and respectable about it well but
in the it's respectable in the sense of
like yes like a Jewish concept as a very
Jewish and self-destructive thing to do
yeah to take this fantastic opportunity
and say okay I'm going to try to achieve
something for all eternity that seven
people are really going to deeply
understand something like that and there
is an aspect to this which is this is
what animates Star Wars mmm-hmm the idea
that obi-wan Kenobi and Yoda
mysteriously survived mm-hmm I mean I'm
not a fan of the original logic Allah
early right but there is one scene which
is precious to me where the Emperor says
execute order 66 and all the Jedi are
killed except to one of which lives by
accident that's obi-wan Kenobi and Yoda
into it's shit you know this is the
genocide and I'm gonna be all that's
left so you are that thing that carries
the seat yeah that's a huge
responsibility but it's also the case
that you're corroding in this extremely
alkaline environment that's like really
beautiful and poetic and and also a
horrible horrifying reality to ponder
but it yet it's a gift to a Russian if I
gave you a horrifying tragic yeah sure
we'll we'll eat it right up yeah yeah
but look I remember and
uh the kkumeul fog Leah I think I'm
supposed to say Paulie a really kind of
retard Wars franchise which I've always
thought to be kind of like the nail in
the coffin of the Golden Age of American
cinema say more I'm really wanna hear
you know it was kind of like uh it
really opened the door it paved the way
for these mega franchises the the Marvel
ization the Disneyfication of film and
her feeling about it was that it was a
kind of epic eternal legend saag a story
that was fulfilled or produced by means
of the most cutting-edge technology and
that this is where our resides now in
kind of the technological capacity of
the Hollywood industry because
transcendence is difficult to
manufacture when you first see what a
technology can do the matrix would be an
excellent other example to discuss in
that case and I'm very partial to giving
this example there were multiple
innovations there was the wire work
there was bullet time with using still
and moving camera images and inter
playing between them and then there was
CGI and so the mind was never sure what
it was seeing right and so you you
devote extra cognitive resources to the
legend and end archetype that's being
explored when you're opened by
transcendence that's why we litter the
set for example with Klein bottles often
because you know to have to have a
glassware from the fourth dimension that
defies the laws of inside and out mm-hmm
opens people up to well what what are
these people are gonna be discussing is
this a way out because I think everybody
wants escape yes and I think that if you
go back to our Jewish tradition the
entire concept of like what is that what
is the epoch that we tell every year is
our Star Wars it's the Passover época
it's the Jews escaping mm-hmm now is the
time when we understand why we tell that
story because we need to get out of here
yeah I I think
a flattering uplifting version is escape
I think the cynical not so flattering
version is all floating a responsibility
in the way that somebody like Erich
Fromm described hoisting the
responsibility for your life on to
another yeah to ask you sort of a final
set of questions yeah where I invite you
back to the pockets when you're next
Danella yes I hope you'll move here I
want to move here it's so horrible I
meant to be an Armenian juice slut who
hangs out at the Glendale Galleria not a
New York girl anyway go ahead pass yeah
that one um where are we in gender space
I have the feeling that men and women of
a heterosexual mindset needed to put
their own mask on before helping
everybody who is trying something
different I like that that's like the
plane and out the yellow gin mascara
that's it yeah and that at the moment
we're trying to like solve 12 million
things that have all been lumped under
trans and I always give the analogy that
strokes occur from excessive clotting
and thinning so you can't say something
about strokes in general mm-hmm because
you don't know what your type of stroke
so we don't know which type of trans hmm
but if you just say look okay we've got
all these things about polyamory and
bisexuality homosexuality none
non-binary relations etc very
complicated let's just so many of the
best of intentions to everybody as a
soul we are now neglecting male-female
heterosexual appropriative relationships
it's like an afterthought we got to do
something where our concerns for all of
these other variations don't obliterate
the major workhorse of societal
perpetuation are your thoughts well
what's the question the thoughts are the
question is are we getting dragged into
a world in which we can't focus on the
fact that the major workhorse of
perpetuation
needs its own care like for example if
you and I both opt in to heterosexual
heteronormative yeah cisgendered etc
ideas we can't really continue to focus
on our subset of people mm-hmm because
immediately at the point is well you
just excluded twelve twelve thousand
other cabins yes I see you as trying to
just excluded 0.01 yeah well but I see
what you I see what you're you're trying
to do in some sense yeah as
reestablishing Feminine Mystique is that
a fair comment yeah absolutely
what do you see the role of mystique
being in heterosexuality the role of
mystique that's a good question you see
I'm so I'm so kind of instinctive and
non intellectual and some level that I
don't even think about this I think the
the a poet would answer in the negative
way I think the absence of the mystique
kills libidinal energy absolutely you
can't be taken seriously as a woman if
you disclose everything about yourself
if you publish naked photos of yourself
at all times I mean that's that's a
statement of fact not a value but we we
used to for example teach women to send
mixed messages right and we used to
teach men and women to play games mm-hmm
and now increasingly there's a sort of
dr. Ruth the vacation of male-female
relations like people should learn how
to communicate be direct say everything
that you want safe sex affirmative
consent all these things that does
anyone ever achieved enthusiastic
consent right I know who leaked or these
people like you pull out an iPad when
you can I touch your breast what's the
it's it's a watch you so much we should
call our lawyers immediately yeah and
sign an NDA an NDA it's like every time
you boot a judge has sex with his
husband he signs an NDA
but it's maddening because the whole
allure of sex is precisely the unsafe
the on concept the on consensual I'm
talking obviously about rape or coercion
but women like mixed messages they like
giving them they like receiving them it
because it's correct that they on some
level don't know what they want and not
because they're stupid or weak but
because it's an evolving communicative
process that unfold you know me well
enough to order for me yeah right like
maybe I would do a slightly better job
of choosing my dish mm-hmm but if you do
90 percent as good as I would have done
ordering my addition you can show me
that you actually grasped me yeah not
only do you get to enjoy the benefit of
having a dish that you wanted but you
get to enjoy kind of the meta benefit of
knowing that your partner knows you I
got in trouble for a tweet where I said
that I like when my boyfriend's or order
food for me that's so hot I know it's so
hot well why would any woman not want
that well I think because I can answer
that from the guys perspective we've all
thought we knew somebody well enough and
we ordered just exactly the wrong thing
which shows that we have no concept yeah
we think we're on top of him we were
just not yeah okay so there's inked in
disappointment that the potential
remember the Aziz Ansari thing where
like he didn't understand which wine she
wanted and that was cause for her to
write a yeah me too so medium issue at
times expose right baby babe net yeah
God but the the the key point would be
that in order to handle certain edge
cases we'd arranged the general case
mm-hmm you know like the world's most
predatory men have to be kept away from
the world's least agenting females mhm
so it in order to handle that case we
gave nuclear weapons I think Caitlyn
Flanagan had a beautiful observation
Flanagan yeah I can't get over yeah
she's great she's great the one that got
away anyway anyway she she said
something to me to the effect of what's
new is that all sexuality proceeds on
exclusively female terms right okay
being that men have to be completely non
agenting because whatever the woman says
happened or should happen yes is the law
of the land and this is precisely what
women don't want it's almost like a
prisoner's dilemma type situation where
you end up with the the most sub optimal
outcome well if your guard against the
thing that you fear the most you'll
never get the thing that you want them
right yeah and it's it's a really kind
of like bleak thing because no women no
heteronormative women want a man who
lacks agency I mean you said this to me
women want they don't want a guy who's
an asshole they want somebody who's
credible and the easiest shortest
weighted describe yet well this is Egon
asshole
there's a reference to a conversation we
were having in which I I claimed that
many men learn a terrible lesson which
is women want you to be an asshole and
the real lesson is women do not want to
be told how beautiful and brilliant and
this and that they are without some of
that energy being spent on credibility
yes some of it accruing into reliable
dependable material echo but sometimes
you have to say you look very nice it's
not my favorite dress yeah but and that
sounds a little non positive but it goes
a long way to say okay I'm actually
getting real feedback are you describing
the the art of neg you have to neg a
little no I'm saying that that happens
naturally mm-hmm negging is where you
actually create like a kind of a hole in
the person yeah I know it's exactly not
negging yeah this is the thing I mean
it's a beautiful example it's a
miscommunication in the process of
giving somebody you can give somebody
very positive constructive feedback and
the slightest whisper of that wasn't
exactly my favorite thing we'll be heard
as a shout mmm because that's how we
human beings process criticism and so
you have to spend some people would much
rather that you spend some of your time
building credibility so that whatever
you do say that's positive is actually a
credible indicator of something because
you know
traditionally the key question is is
very often what women are asking is is
there something you find in me that is
so rare that it would outweigh all other
temptation mm-hmm and can you please
tell me a story in which that's true
the answer is no ladies the answer's no
and run for the hills I'm kidding I'm
just doing a sarcastic little bitch but
well don't do that man why not I don't
know I mean if it's your stick but I do
think that there's some aspect to this
where we have to struggle with this for
you're an older millennial yeah I'm an
elder Milani you're an older millennial
yeah the guys the studio are like going
to get snacks or so tired they're like
enough of this no I'm an elder
millennial on I do think that in part
you know you probably knew more life
before the apps
yeah a big transitional issue well it's
gonna be a huge issue I don't I mean I
don't know what's gonna happen to the
next generation after me I'm afraid for
them I mourn for them because they have
no I mean all social relations it's like
you know going back to those kind of
empathy templates that I was talking
about yeah all social relations and you
know on some level particularly sexual
relations have become very a sperg in
they've become autistic people can't
read nuance and they are completely
incapable than of the art of seduction
and so everything operates according to
like templates and consent form phone
trees yeah and yeah and and it's
terrifying because I think like what
it's not just women who desire
credibility what each sex desires from
the other is credibility manifested in
different ways you know like I made this
joke I started seeing a shrink recently
you went there I went there because I
guess my my Jewish side finally
overwhelmed my Russian side that's like
profoundly hostile and suspicious of
therapy
I did it primarily to appease my
boyfriend but that's another story and
it occurred to me it dawned on me during
the process of seeing this shrink it's
like you know go you know the old that
kind of psychoanalytic concept of
transference I mean everybody does right
and I think transference for men is
saying this was wicked what the tweet
you're about - oh yeah the you know
transference for men is telling the
shrink I want to fuck you
transference for women is asking the
shrink do you want to fuck me and
semantically it's a slightly different
configuration but it comes down to the
same thing and it's like that John
Berger quote that I quote all the time
ad nauseam to the point that it's become
annoying and my friends don't speak to
me because it's all I do is quote this
quote all day
men watch women watch themselves being
watched
that's the nature right it's the kind of
old traditional basis of female or male
versus female sexual arousal right as
you said this to me which I thought was
very astute I've never heard anybody
else put it this way yeah we both come
to some version of this independent the
same thing yeah it's men are aroused by
the woman the presence of the woman
women are aroused by the kind of picture
of themselves arousing the man or that
the man some in some ways metaphorically
acts as a mirror and the better the man
the better the quality and the watering
the quality of the reflection right and
that's not to say that women are
completely indifferent to male looks and
the like but that to an enormous extent
we've demonized narcissism when in fact
we find narcissism to be an extremely
beautiful trait in a future spouse as
men and this is this is a very important
point too because I'm very much a critic
of like kind of narcissism as a
generational pathology but that's it
I'm critical specifically of kind of the
maladjusted pathological manifestations
with the MAL is a diversion maladaptive
or doesn't know much properly to the
partner yeah not the but not the
positive kind of credible and this was
really wonderfully you know sometimes I
feel so awful about myself because I
misjudged the situation I'm so used to
like people and are and ideas being kind
of low density and low nutrition I'm
gonna kind of starved for simulation
stimulation in that way and sometimes
I'll read or see something that I find
really remarkable and I always have to
ask myself the question like hey like
have my standards plummeted so much or
have I grown more tolerant which at the
end of the day is the same question but
there was a very viral short story on
the New York or by this woman christen
repent and also in Armenian by the way
who it was called cat person and in it
she describes kind of a classic me to
type situation where a young college
co-ed gets into a relationship with like
a kind of older washed a 38 year old guy
and there's just the older and 38 well
it for her because she's like 21 line
it's okay I think I think I think a man
okay look don't go backpedal I'm not
back okay I think I'm kind of the peak
manhood is 35 to let's say 55 right
that's a good window that's when the
male race I'll give you a shovel you can
try to dig it yeah I think my own grave
that's really what I really want I'm
like um you know that guy fundamentally
identify with the Russian guy in The
Sopranos and the pine barrens episode oh
my gosh I don't even get it yeah that's
fantastic but basically rip any and she
has she crafts this whole sex scene
where this girl is like having sex this
guy that she finds profoundly
unattractive and undesirable but what
gets her off at the end of the day is
her imagining his arousal her like
nubile young body writhing around for
him and I thought that that was like a
really brilliant glitch that was I'm
shocked that like you know a liberal
paper of record would publish it's very
odd what gets through these sets yeah I
watched your description of the wasted
opportunity of sexualizing stewardesses
where everyone has the sense that oh my
god you know Pan Am stewardesses in the
60s mmm it's a universal kind of weird
beauty norm but there's now this very
strong sense of like and wasn't that
horrible mm-hmm and so this sort of the
two-dimensional fantasy of coffee tea or
me mm-hmm
versus the abject horror of okay well
you weren't allowed to compete on price
because of the regulation of the Airways
and so people competed on the
sexualization mm-hmm of the flight crews
and then some of the flight crews were
like actually being oppressed and some
of them were self sexualizing like
people do an Instagram yeah because they
wanted the attention and there's no
language to pull these things apart
hmm well as usual people missed the
point of that tweet which was not about
stewardesses they made it into a labor
issue because everything creasing ly the
culture has kind of dried up so much
that people increasingly see things
through the lens of politics that tweet
wasn't about labor at all it was
actually kind of a very subjective
indictment of the way that American
women behave relative to women elsewhere
women in Italy in Thailand in Spain and
Brazil in the Middle East understand
that their unofficial power is garnered
through indirection as you say American
women understand no such thing I mean
Camille Paglia again has been beating
this drum for decades now so this was at
nothing to do with it wasn't like a
labor but it isn't it is I mean this is
the this is the very difficult thing
coming from an American context which is
that very often the cultivation of
exclusively womanly power
took place because women did not have
alternate options yeah and sometimes
we've gone too far in American culture
by giving away power that is you know
entirely functional so we you and I both
discussed having economics and
mathematics in our background the
brilliance of Sylvia Nasser's book A
Beautiful Mind I did not see the film
and you haven't seen the film no I will
get fact that okay yeah but and then we
talked about Rebecca Goldstein's the
mind-body problem in both of these books
you see this very strong hand of the
community of wives of the mostly male
mathematicians and economists directing
the field who should collaborate with
who who should make up with who I was
having a spat who should be hired as
you'd be invited to the conference and
that kind of there's a question about
when women stopped wanting that role in
the United States context no one took
the role over mm-hm and so it was like a
load bearing role that was now vacant
hmm
there are ways in which I think it's
terrible that nobody's fulfilling that
role and there's a ways in which I think
it's terrible that women were expected
to fulfill that role having now seen
fantastic contributions in mathematics
you know if people like Karen Dolan Beck
or at least Jeffries that any one of a
number of female mathematicians who have
put structural things in our world that
I can't live without and so I think that
there's a really interesting and rich
conversation about how much power from
the old ways should be retained mm-hmm
and how much of it should be seated so
that more standard professional
accomplishment can occur and because
we're having this very simplistic
conversation we're not getting to the
really rich conversation which is what
should be the renegotiation of male and
female roles around it shouldn't be that
trying to be a substitute copy of men
right on the other hand it can't really
go back to women hold power in pregnant
well I wouldn't say that no it's also
the terrifying matriarch that the hell
that daughters-in-law are put through in
many cultures yeah you know it's it's
it's a very the key issue and I think
this comes through with everything you
talk about the war that we have to wage
is the war on simplistic easy answers as
opposed to nuanced richness yeah and
well and this goes back to this question
of hyper normalization where we are
grafting we are effect I mean Angela
Nagel talks about this who I think
Angela's a friend of mine but I think
she's also think that was brilliant
young intellectual around now and she
gets kind of pilloried all the time for
also being a reactionary conservative
whatever Neagle talks about this idea
that we in her critique of the
handmaidens tale or The Handmaid's Tale
sorry the we are kind of left fighting
the simpler battles of the past that
we've crafted this kind of cold war by
Nerissa Canal adji you know the East
versus the West conservative versus
progressive or liberal that no longer
computes because we live in a bizarre
nonlinear world with a kind of profusion
a superfluous upper fluid of information
that makes anybody's brain short-circuit
well you know this is like what our
friend Amanda Fielding the psychedelic
countess who extolled the virtues of
psychedelic chemicals hmm her point is
that the default mode network is this
thing that suppresses our brain from
experiencing too much and the sanity and
a well-functioning mind for the most
part is attached to not perceiving
everything that's going on around you
yeah and it's selectively kind of maybe
subconsciously chart cherry-picking
things that are
the quantum soup that you and I are
currently swimming and can't be
proceeded yeah we need to perceive a
simplified classical world in which you
know you were a unified person rather
than all sorts of subroutines running
you know simultaneously some of them are
just some of them not and this is I
think this is the difference between on
some level again this is all very like
improv and stuff but it all kind of goes
back look folds back on itself the
difference between Russians and
Americans is that Russians think that
they're an intellectual and moral
advantage because they perceive all the
meta processes they see the chessboard
but they're actually at a disadvantage
fundamentally because they're kind of
overly - too much they feel ec much they
feel too much and they're overly not
only critical of the outside world with
their hypercritical and they're
fundamentally a self-defeating law on
that level you know I have to say I have
a sadness about some of your views on on
Russia
oddly and I didn't think about this you
are the third out of I don't know what
is this my 16th mm-hmm interview it at
this point I don't know when you'll
debut but of a Russian background I had
Vitalik of the theory and famous yeah
Gary knew this I knew I I made equipped
to my boyfriend I was like you know I
was like oh I'm gonna do the Eric
Weinstein Weinstein podcast and it's
funny that he chose you know Kasparov
and veteran it's like you have also some
sort of like a psychic Freudian
compulsion to draw - I care about
meaning yeah to be honest Russia and the
Soviet I mean there are places that just
are pregnant with meaning meaning yet
and there's a ton that I hate about that
world and I think I talk to you about
the barbell society but the lowest of
the low and the highest of the high but
I chose to retain this culture I mean
you know it was my grandparents on one
side and my great-grandparents on
another
who came over so I'm a little bit deeper
in this thing than you are because you
were born there hmm I don't want to give
it up and I work I work my ass off to
retain it even to the point of learning
a tiny bit of Russian just to deal with
Russian relatives that who were
rediscovered when the Soviet Union came
apart we thought had all been wiped out
in the Holocaust you're gonna have to
work your ass off to keep that
connection and I intend to have many
more Russians many South Asians many
people from very particular places I
have the utmost reverence for example
for the UK and the genius of Spain and
Italy you know these particular places
that are just incredibly pregnant well
Spain and Italy I mean are wonderful
because they're you know it every once
in a while I'll go to Italy or Spain and
you'll be like edit little cafe like an
outdoor cafe and they'll serve you
they'll give you some free shit with
your coffee they'll give you like a
little biscuit or croissant it's a
really weird model because the thing
that makes them economically unviable
that makes some kind of fundamentally
obsolete to neoliberal system is also
the thing that makes them morally
redeemable but it's also an unabashed
look Russia's a genius based culture in
what way that you Revere the love
Lando's you revere you know the
Rachmaninoff cyou this is I think that
this is um a thing that is dying now
because the the last 30 or 40 how long
has it been it's been 40 years now since
the Soviet Union collapsed the
30-something years the the last several
decades of privatization I think have
been much harder on the Russian psyche
than the 70 odd years or so what we're
all getting worse at this yeah but I
think that this is slowly waning you
know Russia was
it was known basically for its
educational system for its athletic
programs and no more right yeah but some
of these things were bizarre everybody's
getting less genius that's true and also
not true who's getting more in a really
profound way in a profound way I mean
that's a good question I I have to I'll
get back to you on that I'm just saying
everybody's taking a huge hit at the
moment it's like we started belching out
lead exhaust from leaded gasoline that
the IQ of the world functionally is
getting dumber and dumber and dumber
like since the medieval era
I mean people brown upon the Middle Ages
is like you know they're not called the
Dark Ages for nothing but people have
reached a really high pinnacle of
achievement right this is music from
back yeah I do too and I don't even like
music I mean I do but I have like a very
kind of one-dimensional hobbyists
sensibility I'm not like a musician or
composer yeah but yeah I think the whole
but I think this is do kind of to the
proliferation of information
technologies the triumph of the internet
and you look at me too me too is the
Nexus of a kind of the imperatives the
market imperatives of the Internet and
the triumph of feminism it wouldn't have
had feminists are very fond of saying
that we live in a patriarchy if we lived
in a patriarchy there would be no viral
online movement called me too
the fact is you know now in this day and
age women are the cultural brokers and
gatekeepers and they're not doing that
great of a job I mean I want hedy lamarr
back I yeah yeah I I was gonna write
this book about Marie Curie called
radium slut mm-hmm and it was about the
it was gonna be about the prohibition of
her to come to Stockholm for her second
no belt that she was getting should up
by a married guy I'm
my favorite story in physics is Madame
Wu figured out the asymmetry of the weak
force in the cobalt-60 beta decay in an
electromagnetic field
I want those amazing hot sexy brilliant
chicks back yeah they don't exist that's
why that's why you know there's a
cultural fixation on Russian women
because only in Russia or like in the
Russian amniotic fluid can you find a
woman who has like a PhD in full all
cheer linguistics but looks like a
supermodel and is great in the sack and
knows the powers of seduction well
there's the this is like the super
dangerous thing in there's a way of
saying that's a little bit less fun than
what you say I love listening to you but
I also like not being nailed to a cross
one when I win when they list abuse to
the audience yeah which is to say that
the cultures that we're women enjoy self
feminizing but don't see this as
competitive with intellectual
achievement yes Russia and to some
extent Eastern Europe is one but East
Asia is also yeah and I would love to
talk to you about all manners of
dangerous disgusting horrible vile and
illegal things yeah but I hope you'll
accept an invitation to come back
through the portal when you're next out
in LA yeah and thank you for showing up
and just bringing aside that maybe not
everybody's seen before that's
horrifying I'm very happy to do it I'm
happy to chat anyway thank you for
having me well I'm sorry to horrify you
no wait do you get a buzzer that tells
you in the time no okay I'm just sort of
thinking that you've got this happening
party to go to
okay but then I want to be respectful
you can that otherwise I'd completely
monopolize you tell the kiosk oh yeah no
it's fine okay yeah you've been through
the portal on a fat Jannetty on that's
yet please check out the Red Scare
cast come with an open mind and
hopefully don't give her too much grief
unless that's good for building her
audience with respect to the portal
please subscribe on Apple's stitcher
Spotify wherever you listen to podcast
and also navigate over to our YouTube
channel where if you'll subscribe and
click the bell you'll be notified of any
upcoming episodes and the svidaniya
Sevilla Java all the best
[Music]