we'll be in a second notice okay go yeah
so we're just hi good morning we were
just talking we first started recording
and we started talking about game B and
the types of folks in there and then
that led us right into the subject so we
press record because there was a post in
there a few days ago do you did you
write down the exact words or anything
or have a screenshot or anything yeah I
mean it's there
we didn't delete it over there because I
mean it was like okay so somebody came
in that had it was a new new person
right yeah they came in to the group in
there and they made it they looked
around for a bit apparently and then
made a post that that was something this
group is all white people by my scan
yeah and how do we create a new world
how are we envisioning a new world if
we're not like how can we how could we
possibly do that without being more
diverse is Right what language fused but
it was very much like I came here it's
all white people right that was fun in
an Omega rural way and we didn't respond
as a community you know make a roll away
either
okay what's the Omega rule I don't even
know that forgive me that's it's it's
complex Raymond it's like I need the
signal and the noise right giving if you
if somebody kind of triggers your
emotions to give them the benefit of the
doubt that there's something you're not
understanding and something that is
there and healthy and tease that out
help you bring that out cool and so then
so I responded mods are we going to
tolerate this blatant racism and then
you came AG said what do you think is
racist about this and I was like okay
I'm just not I'm not gonna respond
because I do not because because I have
no doubt basically what was I think is a
jewel of Jubilee and I had any
difference on this week I'm sure we
could talk it out and understand each
other if I tried to do that in this
forum right now I don't think we could
spend like 10
and still not have understanding so I
just did it yes yes I guess yeah so I
should I try to answer I mean yeah you
said your part it was like my learning
around it and with it that I also wanted
to discuss but yeah first your what what
was racist about her post so you say
okay you still do you have that question
legitimate like for real I want you to
answer it's supposed to be assumed okay
well that's my first question you are
you asking that like is it kind of
rhetorical like you just want to have a
conversation or are you
yeah so when you posted it I like it
feels a little like okay someone comes
in there very game a PC culture I'll you
know that kind of thing which is normal
coming from gaming like it it is the the
ethos of our time and so there's a lot
of white people which is true there are
we do have a disproportionate amount of
men and white people for sure but they
did like it's like well what do you
suggest we do about it is my always my
like great so what are you gonna do to
change that like what is what is the the
issue and I came to you're right that is
racist that she wants us to have more
diversity not because I would love us to
have more diversity I would love us to
have more physical visible everyone
right I want everyone in that space but
what that means in an inclusive open
space that isn't a panel of ten people
right it is thousands of people and
growing and hopefully growing so what it
would mean to even a toe is not two it
would mean not admitting white people
and not admitting ya would be both
sexist and racist it would be both like
that's an example yeah and what do we
get what are we supposed to do if it's
an open group and it just happens a lot
of white men are interested in this
particular subject matter what does that
make it wrong inherently or bad
[Music]
that that's the inference right because
it is an open group and people hear
about it one way or the other they watch
something or see something to read
something find their way to the group
and if that happens to be
disproportionately white men that are
interested in this Pacific took his
subject matter is that supposed to mean
something important in the world and
does it mean something different if it's
a bunch of white man as opposed to a
bunch of like Hispanic women that are in
another group with Hispanic women happen
to be particularly attracted to a
particular subject matter group that
they disproportionately go to and does
that mean something about that group
like so the analysis of all that I don't
know I I consider what I was taught at
school that I remember from elementary
school we were like I remember the 80s
in growing up on east coast of the US
like a wholesome life where like we were
taught good values about being a good
person as just a normal thing like one
of the things was like things like who
de owl
I don't know if you remember who did
yellow look we've got like the guy used
to watch the public television station
with Sesame Street me like forgotten all
those things yeah and um and then these
public service ads who DD owl would come
on maybe like give a hoot don't pollute
and then it would be you know he was
running around the woods and he had a
bunch of kids with him and they were
picking up trash or they would you know
oh there's the one with the Indian
crying do you remember that one yes or
the the native Native American
indigenous American but yeah and that
but it really was touching it was moving
and it created a sense of like just a
natural sense as a kid of like yeah I
have a responsibility to do to be good
to the planet and like it was just
that's all gone we don't have that stuff
anymore to the best of my knowledge none
of that stuff and but what we do have is
this horrible fear-mongering about the
invisible enemy carbon that you can't do
anything
you know except giving up your whole
entire life or something but anyway
another one of the messages like they
showed us the Lorax which was all about
remember this is a dr. Seuss book about
patting down all the trees and there's
no more trees left like that's a message
that sticks that lands for me as a kid
which they did make into a full-length
film in the last decade
yeah I loved it I mean my kids watch
wouldn't know all the songs and all that
stuff but then there's the message it
was called stereotyping and
discrimination is what they called it
and then it just taught the basic thing
that if you see somebody and they're
different than you or they're different
in some way you know and you don't treat
them badly because of it and it was you
know came I came up with a clear
understanding that is just the kind
thing to do
that you would never assume something
about somebody because of a physical
feature they have that that is just rude
so if somebody is a different like has a
color skin that's not common in your
where you're growing up to assume
something about them because their skin
color is different it's just bad manners
it's just in not nice behavior because
you don't know them yet get to know them
as a person they're a human being just
like you are and until then if you want
to get to know them and come up with
judgments that's totally different than
just assuming things about them because
they look a certain way yeah I was
blessed I was taught as a kid and that
seems like a really good like all the
things I've been naming this that I
remember being caught as a kid
these to me are good social behaviors
positive social behaviors that create a
cohesive working social environments
where people can get along and do stuff
together yes so despite my lack of it
eat social like really deep social
graces of any kind until I was in my 30s
these things still did stick with me
you know and so that's my definition of
you know state would call it
stereotyping discrimination I don't know
they outright use the word racism back
then but so when I wonder when the word
racism sort of becoming a word that was
more talked about in my world I just
assumed it meant the same thing roughly
that you know racism is when you see
somebody identify physical
characteristic about them and then make
assumptions about them and then
characteristic yeah right so basically
if you're gonna come into a group
identify a physical characteristic of
the majority of the group and then
disparage the group because of that that
is exactly that behavior so this is like
so crystal clear to me I'm actually
quite baffled what happened in the world
to where that clarity got lost
yeah like I don't even really understand
is there a better way to behave that I'm
it has changed and I don't think what
game B needs to do is shift and become
PC culture and I don't think we're gonna
do that I think we're actually a
knee-jerk reaction to that and they
thought Oh logical emotional reaction to
it as well but also knee-jerk right and
so when someone comes in we have a
knee-jerk reaction to be like oh that's
you know the pre trans fallacy like more
of the imperial ken wilber work I'm
never going to be able to explain it
right because I can only do it with
abortion because I can't think of
another option but um the pre trans
fallacy is is the idea that we have we
continue in a progression as as
individuals and a society we go from a
position of let's say being Pro to be an
auntie and then Pro again and the
difference between the first Pro in the
second Pro is a world of difference but
to the middle person it looks the same
and so so if you're someone who is
pro-life this is the way who bring an
abortion pro-life and you're like you
know we couldn't possibly like be
killing fetuses that's murder that's
that to know women have the right to
choose hundred percent doesn't matter
what it's for what reason it is
absolutely all of the women to maybe
it's a little more complex than that I
mean but we don't use it for birth
control I mean you know I mean maybe we
don't see the person in the middle
looks like you're trying to take our
rights away and it's you don't be the
same there's nuance to the other one
right like I'm like right I don't think
I should all decide what you do with
your body but nor should we like it be a
frivolous thing like taking a two
thousand like alright it's not nothing
and it is devastating to anyway so I
think that is exactly what is happening
with racism is it's like okay there's
this in between that is PC culture and
those of us who are like I get it I get
that there is a privilege to be in white
and there is a systemic racism and
invokes everything that is like just in
everything I'll see that we have
subconscious bias and all of that and
we're breaking it by demanding everyone
like shaming people into it like there
is no I know how I've gotten to be less
racist or more woke in any way is not by
being shamed it's by wanting to be and
seeking it out and so the idea that we
can shame people into being better
people is like ridiculous white men
right of all classes of people they're
not going to receive your shame they're
going to become more racist if anything
yeah especially when you're in a
position of privilege right it's hard
like if you're in game if you're
succeeding at game a it's really hard to
see game B as a valid option it is and
it's the same thing it's like wait like
you're trying like there is a truth to
it feels like you're getting your
privilege taken away because you are
actually and like there's a animosity
that there's like and you're not allowed
to have emotions about it simultaneously
and there's a lot of conflict in the
world because of I think we and we do
this in game be to the difference
between the individual and the group
right someone comes into a group and
they're treating us as a group not as a
series of individuals and there's really
not over get around it right right but
then someone comes in is like oh like
one in fact there are people who left
over that post we're like this is an
unintelligent conversation about a
complex issue and it's like right
because there are some people in here
who can't have an intelligent
conversation about that the vast
majority actually can and that's amazing
but the odd person who can't should
shows it shows up like that right so
anyway so this is trying to get into the
slightly more complex what brought up at
me because this post is going on this
person we know is it Ben but as soon as
this post its there's gonna be a
shitstorm right people aren't gonna
ignore it
they're not gonna act with Omega roll as
much as we want everyone's act with
Omega rule because a hundred percent of
people can't do and even if 99 percent
of people do and 1 percent don't it's
gonna show right this 1 percent but
that's part of creating game B right is
we're creating in an even bigger world
right
I have frustration because my version of
game beat is not involved the
government's and hierarchy in the way
that it is and it's like that's what
it's constantly in game B but we're like
where are they like you moderate it you
step up and do it
you show a mega role that's how the
administering them in I don't know you
don't do that very well in the written
format an actual mechanism a permission
that has to be given to be a mod so that
you could actually have the ability to
and that's it is and that's I think it's
not like that's part of game B tries to
be whose buddy there's a bit more new
talk about onboarding right that and I
think that it's important to have
something that on boards people but it
also is important to not recreate game B
101 where you feel like you've graduated
now you know game B because it's if you
don't leave the onboarding with a C and
with a feeling of oh this is more
complex than I thought it was and I even
if I know how to create game B I don't
really know how to create game B we
didn't do so we broke something we
didn't do something right and anyway
that um but when people come into game B
they come in with the idea of everything
in game a all of the ethos all of the
races all of the woke PC culture right
now which in this group we could call
the blue church yeah I mean okay yeah I
really really like that and if anybody
hasn't read Jordan halls
situational assessment like three
thousand fifteen or sixteen or something
blue church edition or something it's
it's really good
blue church but I know that's part of
what is yeah well quick it's just it's
just this the way you're talking about
PC culture it is it is the it is not
just so the culture is kind of part of
the media aspects and but it's it's got
all the facets you know it's got an
economic component it's got a political
component it's got an educational
component it's got a health care good
but it's got a media component it's got
and it's this way of thinking that has
this like you know just read the article
chart does a really great job of
describing it but I think it does
encompass what you mean by PC culture so
I just want to drop that in there yeah
so the blue church let's go game B lingo
the blue church is someone comes in they
don't know what the blue church is
because they don't know who Jordan Hall
is they don't you know what I mean they
didn't necessarily do that so they come
in with that understanding they look
around and go wait this is a bunch of
white people trying to save the world
welcome to white Savior ISM welcome to
which if we were doing what they think
we're doing they would be correct if we
were reinstituting a new world order
figuring out exactly what game B is and
implementing it it would be a huge
problem that we don't have diversity
like all of the diversity and at the
same time that's not what's happening
right it is an open group people come in
they find their people they create
projects or they don't and people don't
even really know that's going on so when
someone comes in and they go yes there
is a bunch of white people we need to
have a way of dealing with them they
just like you're right what do you
suggest like dealing with it in the
Omega rule and when you see when you
posted the hey mods had been like should
we be kicking her up for racism I
thought you were you were joking
pointing out what we're talking about
but doing it in a very um like in a
somewhat sarcastic way right like that
that type of um obviously be agreed to
so obviously if you're going to name a
group of people by a physical
characteristic and then disparage the
group because they are of a physical
characteristic that is to me the
definition of racism in unkind bad
social behavior disconnected because
you're judging identity politics is
absolutely toxic to me because this is
exactly that act is you described of not
looking at somebody as an individual
getting to know them learning about them
and see
what you'd like don't like positive
traits they hold back whatever the
things are like do that as individual to
individual don't know somebody and you
want to assume things about them based
on their physical characteristics you
are engaging in the exact you know
identity political behavior that is
disconnected yes on relationship
building it is it is causing you to not
be able to relationship with that person
not be able to know that person exactly
and so it is the opposite thing to do so
I very literally men this is clearly
racist to come in here say well this is
white and therefore it's bad that is the
act of discrimination stereotyping
racism I don't know if there should be
yeah this is a blue church to have a
very clear definite different
definitions of these things I don't know
I don't know but but at the same time I
don't know what her name was
but the person who came in has a certain
understanding from game a from the
culture that like this isn't right and
then someone being like you and honestly
calling someone racist is the most
horrible thing you can do right which is
what she's doing and at the same time in
no way gonna be able to be receptive
right like someone calling her racist is
a somewhat higher attack than her
calling us racist like in my viewpoint
but that's not necessarily what does I
mean that because it's the permeated
because the pre trans thing right when
she comes in and he's in the middle
state and she doesn't know one from the
other it's like well one and it's not
her it's also the group in general right
the new people coming in that have the
same experience right wait why are we so
white has anyone pointed this out to you
yet it's like when people tell people
who are smoking that it's bad for them
right throw that out like it's like yeah
they know that we know we're mostly wait
we're not it's come up in conversation
right when we like bring up racism or
like create a bunch for white people
like racism I think you're exactly right
about the pre trans that's exactly what
we're dealing with here's the big
question yeah what do we do if it just
so happens that a certain DNA
configuration you know that gets past
generation generation that happens to be
go with a certain color skin that
happens to make their brains be the type
of people who are more interested in
abstract systems design thinking if that
happens to be true I'm not saying it is
I'm not I don't know that I'd certainly
know I don't even know if that's
scientifically verified but but it's
done but you could if you looked at
differences and you could say like white
men tend to be abstract systems think
there's more than the brown we have
talked about in game B right we have the
space and time and stuff to be able to
do that it's an understanding of it
right like I was just watching there
were two videos that released yesterday
one which I did not watch which is Bret
Weinstein and he had a panel of black
intellectuals on I watched the first
little bit of it I just haven't gotten
around to watching it one of the other
ones is this woman I follow something a
beedi brain and she calls everyone
brains
she's like welcome brains she's like
this really cute little lady person with
with blonde hair and anyway she had a
panel of black people like being eighty
to you a black and listening to them I
was like oh God like what I'm trying to
do in the world is have people show up
authentically right that there's so much
payment that you get from that and
watching these 82 people who are black
talk about their culture that they're
less likely to accept mental health
stigma and you know like all this stuff
right you pray to God you don't go to
therapists you do and and knowing how
I'm raising my kids be unique in an
individual and like as an ATT parent my
kids scrub me sometimes like and she's
actually much better at like putting her
hair together and get pretty don't
outfit on if it was up to me I'm like
right who cares as long as your hair can
be brushed through we're good like as
long as it's not you know mad and matted
we're good and that very clearly a black
ADHD bomb doesn't have that privilege
that like she has to send her kid to
school fully you don't I mean like and I
know that I know that's perfect
that if the home kid goes to school with
messy hair it reflects badly on her in a
bigger way than mine reflects on me
because people do see it as and this is
part of being in the position of
privilege and society when I show up and
I'm a mess no one looks at me and goes
woman gone white people or mess right
they might think that a TV people are a
mess
they might think autistic people are a
mess and I think not queer people we
don't have that stereotype but there's
part of there's more of right I don't
have to teach my kid how to behave in
front of a cop she's not gonna get shot
she's not gonna get right like there's
any way that there is this trigger in me
of like oh god I'm asking people to be
more authentic and honestly I pay a much
lower price for being authentic I walk
around singing to myself
touching nature looking like a crazy
person every morning because it refuels
my soul I don't know if I would feel as
safe doing that if I wasn't white right
like there's an existing in the world in
that way we can't that's not what we're
doing right like that's not right but I
want to solve it so that everyone can be
authentic and I know that my friends
from more conservative cultures I mean
doing what I'm doing in the world in a
way has cost me my family they don't see
the world in the same way I do and they
don't see me in the same way I do and so
there's a certain and I would never have
thought that about my family I can only
imagine if I came from more conservative
roots and could see that that creating
this would cost me that right that like
he's knowing that about my I wouldn't
have started on this path if I knew that
was me and yet now and like of course
that's what it cost me I'm good I'm good
I will find new family I will find a
difference in like I'm not going to
disown my family but you know what I
mean I knew connection and ensure
openness that isn't about DNA and
genetics that is is different what so
this pre transfollow see I think part of
the issue is it does not come off well
in text like not it's made worse by text
instead of video and this is where so
this might be me this is where I
probably shouldn't be an admin because
we are very good at confidentiality I'm
especially
game Bieber I'm like what are we trying
to do but the thing came up and we were
talking in the back room about someone
had haddem I don't they flagged your
post they definitely flagged the
comments under it right there's someone
else who was and they had said something
about like kicking someone out and I was
like they said kicking ramon's out and I
was like that doesn't make sense what he
said
like just to some degree it does if you
weren't you and you just showed up and
made that one comment it free trans
thing and the bigger community it's like
right this doesn't look good you're not
practicing Omega rule this isn't okay
at the same time I was like are you
actually saying Raymond like I don't
know and I still don't know whether they
just because they don't know you whether
they were talking about the you
person and and I was like that's not
like just you can't just blanket Lee
kick someone oh until they've broken a
rule and like it's not like it's your
day well anyway I was like I think he
was joking like I think that that was it
was in the thing that I was talking
about before more of a sarcastic
pointing out the irony that isn't irony
but is irony right like in the pre trans
way and in no way are you getting kicked
out but I was like brings like
instrumental and game B itself I was
like that's not but realizing that part
of that is because I talked to you
right so when I read these things I get
Raymond's energy behind it right like I
can picture you saying it my mind
wearing like I couldn't imagine you
saying hey MA like it has to be a little
bit sarcastic because I can't imagine
you saying it in the tone that it's
taken without you realize I'm at the
what's the trans phase I'm like I think
so I see all sides of the issue and then
it happened lean towards a certain way
of behaving based on my understanding of
all sides of the issue which is
different then not seeing any sides of
the issue being blocked into a wall of
whatever by you're not dissidents or
whatever that causes you to see things a
certain way without being able to see
the whole picture
which is it so yes the blue church will
anything that I say as a white male to
be the pre and so the trans is that
right is that the right way to talk
about it also pretty trans yeah I think
so I mean it's making sense to me really
right so they're all askew but I don't
understand the black perspective or the
underclass perspective to me it's to me
in my analysis or whatever it's worth
it's definitely more related to
economics than it is the color of your
skin
that's comes from personal experience
with me and many of my hippie friends
because you know not angry not and I
know what it's like to be black I don't
that's a fact do I have privileges being
white absolutely that's a fact and it's
we all have privileges we all have
everybody has privileges that other
people don't have in some way shape or
form so I think I think is a really
useful exercise to acknowledge that and
you know all of us have been had the
feeling of being discriminated against
or disadvantaged based on one thing or
the other for me as we started the
conversation privately it's you know
neuro divergence like yeah there is a
huge discrimination against
neurodivergent people if you want it
like play that game and I came to
realize that you know the oppression
Olympics it's probably not a competition
that's worth showing up for cuz what do
you get by winning the gold medal of the
oppression Olympics to say I have been
discriminated against far more than all
of you now what what does that mean it's
I think like yes like hi my heart breaks
for anybody who really has this
experience deep discrimination
consistently and regularly and felt like
all their opportunities in life have
been blocked over some physical
characteristic or whatever it may be
like yeah that breaks my heart and like
what you said like okay so what do we do
like I'm open
but coming with anger and blame and and
just a group identity politics to where
I'm black you're white so that means I'm
this and you're that takes all the
nuance out of the discussion takes all
the personal really
ship building out of the discussion and
doesn't allow transcendent you know
approach to be taken so I yeah I get
really saddened and angry I guess urge
approach to this the blue church
religious approach to this to
immediately weight the questions
anything there's something that's sorry
to interrupt you but there's something
that's coming up for me right now in
this moment
um the thing I talked about about the
ADHD in black people and if there aren't
enough black people honestly in green be
and what we were talking about before we
went live that there's actually probably
a high high high chance if you're in
game B or neurodivergent that there is
those two things or actually probably
why we don't have a lot of black people
in game B that knowing you don't belong
in the world is a common experience in
neuro divergence right is like well I
feel like an alien what are you guys are
all playing by a game I don't even
understand we get to gain B and we're
like mad paintball which is the same
thing I felt when I figured out I was
autistic and I was like oh you're my
people you're the ones who get it I'm
not weird to you but that's that's great
or all weird in different unique ways
that neuro divergence that expresses
itself in the other cultures is even
less free to be itself right then at
least because we're in the blue church
that we are more like the world still is
not okay with our neurodivergent any way
shape or form but they want to be right
bond not neurodivergent and black yes or
in personal comment right yeah and
because basically I can't think of
anyone in game B that I've interacted
with that I wouldn't be like if they
were like yeah I'm on the spectrum I'd
be like no you're not
no no you're not like everyone have
interacted with them like yeah I can see
I can see some more than others and
even have trouble interacting with each
other right that is end up a lot of what
comes up someone will be like I love the
people in the game but you're like I'm
not a snake I'm like join the club and
in fact I tried to start the club and
there was no there was crickets
basically I think because we're all
neurodivergent we either don't know it
and so we don't even know that that's a
part of who we are anyway but that isn't
that exactly the pattern of
neurodivergent sea bed there is it
doesn't matter how many people you see
worshiping at a particular altar of a
particular church we have developed the
pattern of knowing that's not for me and
then knowing that you're gonna that
we're gonna have to deal with the
feelings of rejection and all the things
that come with it so exactly that as a
white male neurodivergent who has
experienced that I was a regular basis
yeah I am very willing to step right
into the middle of the blue church go
right up to the pulpit see you're all
full of yeah and because I'm used
to the idea that I'm gonna feel rejected
anyway what I might as well just speak
my truth because yeah I mean I mean I
think that is our superpower in game be
honestly and it's how we're gonna get to
game B that we're full of ender
neurodivergent people are like oh my
beer I'll do this and if we can do no
well practice you know mega role and I
think you're actually really amazing at
that 99% of the time and you're really
amazing with it even more on video voice
right like there's something about your
energy and personality to come through
in that we're like the pre and this is
partly what I don't type out my thoughts
is I'm like pre trans again not very
well put it like you can't explain all
of the nuance in fact I just milk more
neurodivergent when I try to explain all
those seventeen layers of nuance that
I'm trying to explain constantly right
whereas if I didn't need to do that and
I'm learning not to do that then I could
explain things in a linear way but other
people can understand better
like part of what are the reason I'm not
into PC culture even though I am yeah
but I'm not I've been there done that is
that you can perspective in other words
you've looked you've looked at the PC
culture you relate to it you get it you
get the arguments and now here's where
you've arrived at anyway sorry go ahead
just that PC culture blue church that
you can't make a safe space for everyone
and PC cultures all but like safe space
for everyone like you can't make a safe
space for anyone you how I know that you
can't make a safe space for everyone
who's autistic let alone a safe space
for everyone like what is the safe space
look for autistic group of people well
you need to have bright lights and no
lights and sound and smell and no sight
a sound and no smells like we know that
we you can't make a safe space for all
of us so we don't expect you to make a
safe space for us like right I have to
bring noise-canceling headphones I have
to bring something to smell I have to
bring because I can't expect the world
to accommodate me and that is very
unlike wait a minute why are we talking
about pronouns and not disability like
why are we there is a certain thing
that's like okay well here's this
identity thing that isn't actually
dealing with the individual isn't like
what can help you thrive and succeed and
so it's like well wait why why do we
care about the words that trigger you
and not the words that trigger me or why
don't you care about this and not that
why does one person get something that
one person doesn't just based on the
squeaky wheel or just based on that like
why it's not fair and I need it to be
fair like that's very much I like autism
honestly like needing things to be like
this is not white and it needs to be
fixed because it's like out of order and
it's like both learning from that
struggle within me and healing it of
like you can't control the world you
can't you can't make everyone not snow
the way you want yet if we if you're
sitting in a group of 10 or 20 people
that came together for some shared
purpose or at least they think they have
Freight for the moment they believe
their shared purpose like have you ever
it's such a rare thing to experience 12
to 20 strangers coming together in the
room and somebody say hey you know it's
kind of bright in here do you think we
could turn down
legs little people sure okay yeah okay
hey it's a little cold in here you guys
can we turn up the heat
yeah you know I mean like the just
works itself out when you're actually in
human relationships sitting together
face-to-face being humans of course when
you get online or you abstract it into
large numbers of people it starts the
identity politics stuff the same convert
Mason hey it's a little bright in here
can we turn down the lights you who
are you to tell me turn down the lights
you know you know like ya know ya you
who are you to demand that I have to
turn down the lights because you don't
want that's what it becomes and it's
like that's not the reality of the
situation that we're dealing with and in
actual human interaction it's kind of
maybe it's a Dunbar's number thing you
know like you just simply can't meet
everybody's needs create a safe space
over a certain number it's just gonna
become frickin impossible over a certain
number cuz but if you can break it down
into smaller coherence groups yes you
can make it work always always the way
to make it work and honor that you can't
make a safe space for everyone right
like if you got money people were like
you know what no actually I need the
lights on because I can't see anything I
read people's lips or anything and it's
like Oh could we break into two groups
could you don't you could negotiate your
if the issue is then it feels it does
sometimes feel like wait I know I am
fairly good at asking for accommodation
and except when I'm not um sometimes I
don't feel safe enough I don't you don't
anymore I'm like I'm not gonna tell
people that or marketer but I'm fairly
open I'm TMI I'm like I'm deaf in this
ear I'm gonna ignore you I'm you know
like I need to sit here not there I need
to do but like I feel guilty because I
don't know whether my needs
truly trump somebody else's right
someone else might have more of the need
to sit where I'm sitting but because I'm
more squeaky I get the wheel right like
there's a certain amount of like wait
who gets like I asked for the music to
be and I do I'm like can we turn down
the music because I don't see the reason
to have it loud right it's like if we're
having a conversation I either need to
leave or the music needs to be turned
out I'm good with either option make
Sarah not really good at either option
because you just chose music there's a
certain level of life right
but if it's a party of course like
that's why I'm not at parties but
there's um I don't know but there's
something there's something powerful
here so I want to have this really
powerful got actual relationships is
what I'd say it is looking at the other
human being in the eyes when they look
at you it asks for have a request like
just yeah people work out like
people are kind to each other in general
when you actually have to look at the
person in the eye and show up in some
way the respond who they are you people
seem to be generally kind to each other
as a general statement in the world
second you get out of the face-to-face
discussion and of course not all the
time of course I'm sure there's
perfectly reasonably hey do you guys
mind if we turn up you know I'm sick of
people talking about turn on the heat
what the hell is wrong with you like
that happens from time to time of course
yeah it's really the exception I mean
people people are good kind people and
this is where that's part of my question
that I want to ask people in game be
anywhere is like what is your viewpoint
of humanity as a whole like what is your
feeling on how smart they are how kind
they are how cuz I think that is a big
part of our issue is that we look at
humanity as like a stupid unwashed
unlike mean horrible and we've been that
we definitely do that but there's a
certain amount of there's this parable I
don't roars from of leg which wolf
inside of you to feed it's like everyone
has like the kind one evil one it's like
which one wins well whichever one you
feed and in society we feed the evil one
we definitely have we create a Mrs Brady
like the more sociopathic the more
narcissistic you are the easier it is to
win but the option and I'm from my point
that was but they're like the cure for
that is not to vilify one of the wolves
it's to stop feeding it right like it's
like when you vilify it inside of you if
you're like oh no I'm greedy I'm don't
be greedy that's bad bad you just become
more greedy you know it doesn't like
release itself and I think the same in
society we have to figure out which wolf
to feed but we also
to realize they're both there and my
perspective on that is we just we all
know what it everything we need to know
we learn in kindergarten right like all
the manners and ways to be kind to other
people like it's obvious we all learn it
it's in our programming because we're
tribal creatures like but the second we
get abstracted into non personal
relationships it's like we forget all
those lessons when we look at things
systemically or we look at things
through the economic socio economics of
getting money so I can have me powerful
and free in the world and be fully
expressed in the world like that drive
causes us to be able to go through ever
more levels of you know whatever
sociopathic just unethical behavior
unkind behavior behavior that is not the
lessons we got taught in kindergarten
and and then being accepted of that hey
and then and then kind of never
addressing the conversation that oh
we're acting shitty right now we're
taking all the other kids toys like we
don't even have that conversation and it
just gets buried and it's in the mix and
then it becomes and we learn we learn
more and more techniques subtly to avoid
confronting the fact that we're being
shitty people and yes that's what you
did so you but you can win as you you
have more opportunity to have access to
wealth and power in the world and you
continue to show up as you will not look
at the way you're being a shitty person
as you do that you'll be invited to
higher circle of wealth and power yeah
which is also like the more you see the
world of shitty the more you're willing
to it over and the more it proves
itself is shitty and the more than you
in ownership of the media because those
who owns the media as well you're gonna
put forward a view of humans or shitty
and look at all these shitty humans and
we feed off of it we absolutely do it's
like you tell us all those shitty humans
I don't know what then tell me more
about what we're doing to each other
that's horrible and bio and and
there's something about I know I used to
have a viewpoint of humanity that was
less than stellar but then I realized as
and I still do somewhat as a whole like
I'm like what are we doing but it's like
but I see the beauty of me in the
individual and so I've yet to meet
someone that isn't intelligent that
isn't kind that doesn't have and so it's
like right even when I see people after
acting horrific lian line and I want
them cancelled
besides the very few clear clear cases
it's like yeah and you caught them in
their worst moments and is what we are
doing working is it getting us less
racism is getting us less homophobia
less transphobia no it's not it's not at
all and so even if it feels good to want
to like punish the person that's not
working it's on any level especially
within it within that group within that
central group that's neither pre nor
trans with their like they created the
weapon and it can only be used against
them because the other the other side
doesn't like this side the one side
doesn't care they're like the central
and then when you've transcended you
want everyone to be where you are but
you can also see that central position
to be like it's where we got to go
through to get to this point right how
to get them through that without because
the more we need them to get through it
the more we're doing to them what
they're doing the other side it's like
yeah that's right because my journey of
you know victimhood a deep deep feeling
of oppression like that you know a lot
of time if I could walk into one of
these blue church groups and try to hey
relate hey I gotta get it I want to
share my store showed up your white man
you don't know what it's like oh man so
but my authentic journey is I really
actually believe I really do deeply know
what it's like the field of like the
oppressed person not as a black person
but to deeply feel everywhere I go in
the world I'm looking around and that
person wants to
man that person wants to oppress me
pampers are let's to oppress me and I'm
walking around with that energy of
course you know lot of days when I had
longer hair longer beard maybe less
capped or whatever because I want to
just because I want to express myself
and be Who I am and all y'all
that being radical in that energy of
you're all trying to oppress me so being
in victim automatic wait man if I'm mad
at anything hyung that at the way men in
the world and that's what's that's
ironic like if I had to be racist or
classist about any particular thing as
it would be it would be the white
European culture that incidentally just
so happened if you look at like through
the lens of like a Guns Germs and Steel
like a Jared Diamond lens on this like
whatever white culture that was in like
northern Europe or something happen to
stumble into some technological advances
about using animals or growing a
particular type of food that allowed
them to scale society more quickly and
powerfully and then of course anytime
that happens in any culture and it
hasn't just been white men or a white
culture throughout history there have
been many different types of races and
types of people that have discovered
technology ahead of the other cultures
around them at the other societies
around them and they have conquered and
wiped out their societies that's just a
natural pattern of of kind of non
transcendent human scale and social
behavior right that that is what happens
and so we're still dealing with the
cycle that's like white people that
European something around you know I
wish I was a better scholar on that but
something where we've stumbled into some
technology that allows us to be a
dominant culture and we have been that
dominant culture and now we're getting
we're alerting in a transcendent stage
where we realize dominant culture pyram
being the highest on the food chain and
just dominating because you can is not
going to create a world that works for
any of us and we were reaching that
conclusion and we know that okay now we
can transcend this conversation and do
something different so again that's that
that's the trans right I've gone through
all that I've been a victim I've
literally understood how at some point
I'm giving my power away every time I
claim somebody's oppressing me
I'm literally giving them the power to
oppress me simply by making that claim
because I'm acknowledging they have
power over me and I don't have to
acknowledge that simply by the fact that
I acknowledge somebody else has the
ability to oppress me I give them the
power to choose that I mean it really
isn't like me constantly yeah that like
I do I'm like no this world doesn't work
for me I need it to work for me but also
very understanding of like right it
doesn't work for you that's why you're
here to change it but the people who are
here not to change the world in the
world work so then they cannot see the
world my way like I have to have
sympathy compassion for them like
sometimes it comes out as anger and fear
because like there go like you're
destroying the planet everything on it
you're trying to kill me and you're
trying but that doesn't work really what
we're trying to do like they're they
can't understand my worldview they can't
understand my position in it and I'm
lucky that I have the area of
unprivileged
in a lot of areas just enough that I can
see it and not enough that I'm like
full-on in the inlet like I'm female I'm
queer all I didn't know and so much
later you know neurodivergent disabled
poor lots and lots of fun stuff going on
the one thing I am NOT is a person of
color I have two of the most
disadvantaged groups in my genetics but
I definitely don't look it it's nothing
cultural it's not it's you know some of
my ancestors but not me and thank God
because I can that's the one that I can
empathize with but not be in and having
that diversity of diversity is part of
what gives me Who I am on this planet
right that like I constantly long before
a game be long before my idea of how to
save the world would constantly like
alter things in my head be like oh this
is must be what it's like to be black
this is what it's like to be a woman
right like acquainting gender and race
not actually equated they're exactly the
same but but in my head right like okay
what is it like beauty and intelligence
and being like okay well I always
thought the beauty was the throwaway
thing you're just you luck into it it's
not yours you didn't
earn it well did I earn my intelligence
I don't know I don't think so you know
it's like yes I chose to pursue new
things but it's also my genetic luck
that I end up half I mean the capacity
for my intellect that I do and I was
born to the family that I was and you
know all of all of that and again I
don't know that that was diversity of
diversity that it isn't about like
whatever you called it the like whatever
limb fix oppression Olympics it's like
what piece do you encompass and the
issue with like when me for me anyway
when everyone's like the biggest issue
was racism we have to deal with it I'm
like I wasn't born here maybe to tackle
that one or and maybe would have been
born a person of color like my things
are the neuro diversions I'm not here to
stand in their way either I'm not you
know what I mean I'm here I want to be
an ally but unfortunately what I think
looks like an ally is not what that
middle part thinks looks like an ally
right I'm hopefully trans that but
that's the other thing is I actually
think this can Wilbur's work and I
actually think it's not because pre
trans definitely isn't it's a triad
right you start in pre you're done
middle and then you go trans I think
it's actually like it continues on and
so you never know what position you're
in like you really don't really like
your ideas shift as they get deeper and
deeper and great complexity then you can
go there's a new level of complexities
you can transfer that you could be pre
and then transcend yeah so I think the
thing that I'm most interested in doing
with all this that I pray or you know
like it feels hopeless sometimes because
it's my team and so I'm just not allowed
to be part of the conversation a lot of
the time that's literally I'm told that
straight up to my face
 off white man you don't have a
voice okay so Oh getting what you've
been dishing out for centuries okay well
I wasn't mean but yes I get it okay like
yes like I can see the perspective so I
can't really be too mad
and yet it's real racism coming at me
literally because the color of my skin
or the gender because I have
you have a male body because of only
that I'm not allowed to have voice it's
just literally the definition observer
at the racism or discrimination or
whatever what also is influencer culture
and soapboxing and things because like
to me there's a big difference between
giving somebody the voice versus giving
them a voice right like and they do this
cause it's like injured anything if they
do this less and less now and now they
do it up like they just wanted to plunge
alone far the other way where they're
like can we get her to save a black
weird woman in here to speak please
about like but like you know anywhere
they would interview the white man about
like women's rights and you're like
maybe that's not the person but maybe
he's an expert in it right so it's very
different
entering the random guy on the street
versus the head gynecologist or
something right about women's health and
I really hope that because just as
female just yeah of knowing that they
truly relate to the issues we're sure a
white man could relate to all the female
issues because he has had true and past
the connection with his clients for 20
years there's patients and and really
learn to get inside their head and
understand it's the gas that's totally
possible but how do you know it's a pre
trans fallacy thing again right it's
like do you know you don't know if that
guy is that one who hasn't been
perfectly connected with the experience
of somebody very different than him for
a long enough time to really be a be in
that experience it war or the argument
of course would be is it even possible
to have the depth of connection to the
experience if you didn't actually have
to experience it yourself it seems like
the blue church argues no that's
absolutely not possible you can't
possibly understand but I guess like gee
you don't know what it's like to live as
an empath do you because I can tell you
like yes I'm never gonna live the actual
experience but I also can hear about the
experience without feeling it in my body
so there is like they don't know what
that feels like and so they can't
imagine what that is so they can't you
know what I mean it's like well you
couldn't know what it's like to be that
absolutely watching a movie but does
actually put me
that driver's seat not in the same way
because I can also turn it off right I
can no I can watch a new movie but you
can't turn off your lived experience but
this anyway there's a lot like the
influencer culture because it's like one
person broadcasting to so many that
person if they're talking on a specific
topic probably should be that topic
right like like if I'm if I'm gonna
listen to somebody on racism I'm
probably gonna want to hear from people
who live to that experience but but if
I'm sitting at a table with people I
want to hear everyone's opinion right
that's very different I'm not listening
you don't I mean one person broadcasting
to millions versus having a conversation
and there's something to be offered by
everyone including people who've been
completely and privileged and then woke
up when they're 40 and been like I got
pretty much rubbing white those people
are actually highly valuable well sure
or even people who are steeped in
privilege no can't admit it this is not
the way it's still not the way and I
guess that's that's what I have my
greatest hope that at some point we're
ready to have the conversation some way
or some way we realize we actually have
a lot more in common that we all have
experienced privilege if you were born
in the in the color people of color
ghetto low low income area you know
we're the best thing to do was go sell
weed on the corner and begin you get a
car and somebody you know like whatever
the lifestyle would make you a winner
like you still could be said to have
privilege or for somebody born in Rwanda
where the tribal warfare is like
literally stabbing your family chopped
into pieces yeah and being in threat of
being killed any day right I mean like
so we all have privilege that we all
have privilege and if we could all
acknowledge that we can realize we all
have that in common and we all I don't
care who you are how privileged you
appear to be you know what it's like to
be discriminated against to be out-group
to be the one pushed aside
and not understood well they just go
about their merry way
we've all experienced that more than
others and so but the fact that we can
both all relate to both of those things
is the thing we have in common in like I
really think it would be powerful if we
could get a movement going where we can
admit it emit the ways we are privileged
and emit the ways that we've experienced
discrimination or you know disadvantage
and realize how let's listen to those
stories let's listen to everybody's
stories of privilege and disadvantage
yeah let's let's relate as humans on
that I think that would be a super
powerful exercise I'm in no way gonna
actually read it but Donald Trump's
niece just wrote a book or had someone
else write the book about you basically
his traumatic childhood right I think
it's called too much and never enough
which is the perfect title for it
because that is it's like it doesn't
holding people on a pedestal and
thinking they have the solutions and
they're gonna like save us all like
people feel about Trump is not it's like
that is broken to me we need to figure
out how to save our own our own skin and
how humanity how do you employ humanity
to save humanity because it's gonna take
a lot of us not a handful of us but
there's also like holding one pedestal
not the solution either is vilifying
them it's like he got to where he is
because of his his trauma and to have
sympathy for that and empathy and also
not want him to be the president you
don't need someone with that many wounds
full-out
you know being being the president I
don't I already am dealing with my own
wounds and feeling like you don't I mean
I can show it better in the world the
more I heal myself and yeah like there
is we need to have compassion for one
another and develop the relationships
and start seeing and that is like what
we currently have on social media with
technology is is it's geared towards the
exact opposite I think when it first
came into existence there was a kernel
of when we get a connect we got a talk
you get a talk with strangers and we
were like thought it was gonna
crystallize in that same way and it
turned out it fed the wrong wolf it fed
that like dopamine
I get to hide behind a screen and like
you're wrong and that's where like
having the conversation we're like what
you wrote written by anyone else I'm
like yeah no that's not okay in this
space um right but then knowing you I
was like first all the questions of why
is that not okay why is it not just as
what she said versus what you said
versus like you've been here longer and
whatever whatever like it's we can't get
the nuance in written word and in
Facebook's algorithm how do we with this
very limited platform as a group come
off the best when we're full of
imperfect individuals we're going to
fail constantly and in little ways and
in big ways it's like partly it's
showcasing that and that's where as it
admit like the idea I do think we do it
more on a group level than an individual
level like oh is this is this best for
game B as opposed to right is this
person getting something from game being
are they giving something to game be on
a regular basis the full picture instead
of you know like one off who they swore
they said this right beignet freaked out
about air condition in India and swore
at people because he thought people were
not gonna die this year in India which
is like yeah that's something to get
passionate about and when you do it
constantly and you keep showing up in
that way how much what is that level
right I don't think zero is the level I
don't think once someone does one thing
they get kicked out especially when they
have a series of stuff and at the same
time we can't have a free-for-all like
constantly isn't it man people are like
well just let me post whatever then the
group can decide because the algorithm
is not friendly with that one anyway
right yep so many great trails we could
follow but as usual it feels like we
could go for hours and would like to and
I should move on with my day though yes
the same way I'm trying to keep my
conversations to an hour and plus we're
talking on Thursday to wrap up process
raising so
I'm gonna say goodbye to YouTube