[Music]
after the election of Trump in 2016 a
blog post by deep code went viral in it
the author explained what had taken the
vast majority of the media by surprise
it describes how the blue church
mainstream consensus reality as mediated
by the liberal media is being challenged
by a new web-based insurgency the red
religion that entire document I wrote in
a day and it was actually what ended up
happening was I was having a
conversation with the friend of mine who
said I don't understand what's going on
and I as I was discussing with him what
was going on it dawned on me that the
frameworks that I had been developing
for a long time that I some sass that
Lee assumed were just obvious weren't
obvious and so I expected maybe nine
hundred people might read this and it
might be helpful to five or six and
that'd be cool and obviously it had more
impact than that spread well pretty
widely and so as it turns out it was of
more value than I had anticipated
Jordan green Hall says the channel for
interview and the aftermath is another
important moment in the collapse of the
blue church narrative so during the
interview we see an example of a
delusional framework that is what
appears to be largely incapable of
perceiving and reacting to reality in
real time but much more interesting is
what happened afterwards which was the
sort of the self-healing and policing
mechanism of the larger social consensus
of how when have a blue church
reactively goes about maintaining the
integrity of its frame do you mean when
they tried to characterize it as sort of
abusive trolls and you don't write hero
and all of that exactly exactly what
sort of a to use of a military language
is a fallback position that was a
reactive almost instinctual and not
almost in fact precisely instinct she
was that pure habit and so what ended up
happening was there was a break in the
frame there was a glitch of the matrix
the mechanisms of the blue church
reacted to endeavor to control the frame
and to convert it into a way of sense of
making sense of the what occurred that
still maintained the integrity of its
frame
and that failed as well and so the the
clash between what happened when the
digital environment effectively
completely controlled the frame and the
broadcast environment effectively tried
and failed to do so I think is could be
well characterized as running into the
wall I was a journalist in the Channel 4
News newsroom for about 10 years that's
fun and then working making
documentaries and I I guess I still got
a lot of those similar kind of
connections and ways of thinking and
there seems to be in the mainstream
media a sense that everything's gonna go
back to normal Trump might get impeached
or things it still feels like an
interregnum and that reality will will
reassert itself in some way do you think
that's that's that's naive yes I think
that's naive in fact I would even say
that is delusional my diagnosis of
what's actually happening is that people
are moving further and further away from
what is what thinking actually is and or
more into merely running a script a
legacy framework it used to be thinking
but now it's just a framework for
input-output responses to stimuli hmm
this I think is what we thought happened
in the interview with Jordan Peterson on
Channel 4 News that you called the
glitch in the matrix yeah right
yes I get that could you explain what
you think was going on there then yeah I
think that if you imagine I'm gonna use
some kind of more computational language
but if you imagine a a very simple state
machine that has pre predefined inputs
and predefined outputs of how it
responds to the world effectively that's
what the journalist was running when she
was running a very simple state machine
it had a no capacity to actually
perceive reality directly insert it
could only select from a finite number
of possible states of what was going on
and so this is why we ended up with this
bizarre
where Petersen would say acts and then
she would summarizes so you're saying
something very much not X but this is
because she had like a list of possible
things that could be said hold on like
it's just a finite list of possible
things and so if you if you weren't
saying something was in that list to all
that she could do is select something
from that list for which she had already
a prefab set of possible responses so as
a program in a very computational sense
and and this is what happens when you
begin to become delusional when you
begin to move away from a fluid
intelligence that is in fact perceiving
reality and responding to reality in a
fundamentally creative way into a
functional intelligence which is
selecting from a menu of prefab
interpretative categories and executing
on a program of prefab responses and I
should mention that this is not this is
not rare this is actually commonplace
this is a natural these are both natural
states of the width at the human mind
responds to reality I mentioned the disc
it's actually a fundamentally
conservative principle that it sometimes
it makes sense to have a fluid creative
intelligence that is exploring reality
this is expensive it's often has makes
errors and it's not very effective at
acting in the world let's call it play
or exploration and sometimes it makes
sense to just see something identified
as being associated with things you know
how to do well habits and then execute
on those habits efficiently and then
output the problem is when you don't
have the ability to switch out of a
habit mode into a creative mode and this
is a particularly problematic situation
when reality requires that you do that
when when you're driving your car and
something anomalous happens and instead
of responding to the anomaly in reality
you just keep running scripts you're
gonna actually run into a wall at full
speed as try as we might our desire to
interpret reality to mean what we wanted
to mean at the end of the day will
always be checked against what reality
actually is maybe sometime you know
we're pretty good
at making things up and pretending but
eventually reality is reality the
culture were the the 20th century was a
decisive success for blue and a
effectively a route for red so what we
see first is that red was forced to move
into a deeply exploratory phase second
that it did this in a context where as
it turns out things were changing
meaningfully quite significantly in fact
it from my perspective a in a world
historical level the emergence of
entirely new forms of communication and
therefore entirely new forms of sense
making and coherence it's not
necessarily the case of those two things
would have overlapped but they did and
so in a context of a a blue church and
blue faith hegemony and I should mention
by the way we're particular the blue
faith increasingly was it was utilizing
its coercive authority over most of the
collective intelligence channels media
and education in particular to establish
its dominance at the level of values and
to extinguish red values putting an
enormous amount of selective pressure on
the the the groups that we're
endeavoring to operate under red values
and of course selective pressure either
kills your it makes you very clever and
so ended up happy news you've got a lot
of exploration of different ways to
survive and thrive under was it what
we're changing conditions and that's
that's I think the thing to be really
focusing on you're imagining as I am
that we are witnessing a transition
we're witnessing a shift which is
largely characterized by on the one hand
legacy which has lots of power and
inertia and energy behind it and and
emergent which has the advantages of
being closer to a
shift in reality it's a ship a ship that
has a lot of inertia that is in the
process of trying to turn so the state
is blue church but the rate is red
insurgency or more specifically the
actual underlying shipped in broadcast
in digital so one of the things that
we're witnessing or one of the things
that we can use this event to make sense
that is saying okay where are we on that
trajectory what is the rate of change
and how are the relationships between
the inertia inertia power a coercive
capacity of blue visa V the emergent
capacity of red you can almost like
imagine two lines in a graph okay where
are we on that crossover so what I would
say is this represents we're getting
closer and closer to the point of
crossover and that implies significant
things across a number of different
domains and we can then use that to make
predictions about what's likely to
happen in the future under different
circumstances
say for example I apologize any kind of
event that emerges where there's a
social need to make sense of what that
event means for the purposes of then
choosing how we're going to respond we
can now predict that the capacity of the
blue church to control the frame and
impose sense-making on it is now below
some threshold and that the emergent
capacity of this new phenomenon to be
able to control the frame and make sense
of it is now above some threshold
openness is creative experimentation the
willingness to step away from habit and
order and to take risks to see if any
novelty happens to emerge that's a look
of a deep value and it's the kind of
value that is usually more common in the
complex that shows up as blue hmm
at a physiological level which is why
it's a sort of an interesting paradox
that blue
I kind of got stuck in an ideology
around openness rather than openness
itself which also is probably the
pathway to how it actually finds its way
out of it actually that that's actually
quite important if there's a way for the
quote-unquote children who believe which
is to say those beings humans who are
able to fully connect with the
underlying values in a way that is
separate from and liberated from the
constraints of both ideology and habit
and then embody those values in a fully
authentic way we'll discover that there
is something that authentic thinking
that is not the same thing as simulated
openness there's a distinction between
an actual open mind and the simulacra of
open mind that is characteristic of the
modern left you can grasp that and
really embody that you will be more
fully in connection with your actual
values and by the way also no longer
delusional and therefore an actual
exponent when I'm calling the children
of blue neither red nor blue as pure
elements contain the ingredients
necessary to actually be adaptive to
reality this is a disaster
in fact it's a little bit like
separating the hand and the eye now
you're the eye can see
if the eye takes itself as being the
essence of virtue it separates itself
from the ability to do the same thing
with the hand this is not a good thing
and so and this is what I was calling in
terms of purple there's hopefully wound
up happening is that the values that are
currently being held back by the blue
church will separate themselves
rediscover their actual values separated
from their ideology and then in gather
and engage in a an authentic exploration
of these new modalities of collective
intelligence and begin the process of
forming some new collective intelligence
in the process of doing that they will
also rediscover their ability to form
extremely effective alliances with the
value structures that are currently
largely showing up in red mmm usually
incompatible far from it and for most of
human history these groups have actually
always co-mingled they're necessary that
they actually relate to each other in a
deeply healthy
and direct fashion their separation into
armed camps is extinction area actually
so then will end up happening is that
you'll see this what I called a Cambrian
explosion because it will be extremely
if you take the values of openness as a
pure aspect they will explore quite
openly they'll explore vigorously and
they're effectively well the values of
red that you think blue needs to
integrate or to make or to reintegrate
oh well that's actually pretty easy
responsibility
I mean we've actually even seen it the
ability to make a commitment and keep it
which which by the way ideologically
shows up is either duty or loyalty but
those are both ideologies the the deeper
sense is that ability responsibility
both of the individual in the group
level the ability to actually really
make a personal sacrifice on the part of
the group that's actually a deeply read
value and I don't mean that by the way
as politically ideological certainly
there are people who are currently part
of blue who feel that deeply what I'm
saying is that that shows up much much
more intensely in red and when you're
feeling it in blue you're actually
feeling a red value and that's good
mixing that's crucial because that's
very jordan peterson esque
- how would you how do you define jordan
peterson or do you think the fact the
issue is that he is is not definable
within one of those two camps yeah I
think that's the point I think that he
grasps directly the fact that human
beings can only actually make sense of
the world by virtue of communication
with other human beings and this is all
about the notion of admixture that one
must have a mixture of of whoa I mean he
uses the mythopoetic to make sense the
order order and chaos the way right the
taoist way is the alchemical admixture
of order and chaos and that's it like
that's how you do it and so if you bias
towards orderliness you find yourself in
a rigid non adaptive non creative non
exploratory framework which will die
because the world changes if you bias
towards chaos you you eat your young and
evaporate which also ties for obvious
reasons
and the key is to actually enable these
things to be in relationship with each
other and vital healthy relationship
with each other and I think that's in
some sense the essence of what he's
focused
and instead of the core what he's acting
about now it it does it seems to me that
on the one hand he connects war hmm yeah
it does it seems to me that he connects
more closely with a lot of the values
that would come out of read out of order
lines at a personal level I certainly
know that when I interact with his stuff
when I perceive his videos I read his
works the aspect of me that has that in
it seems to be the part that is called
out and connected like I can feel the
aesthetic of say Sparta which is very
sort of read as a as a metaphor moreso
than Athens but not radically so and as
a consequence I think this is also one
of the reasons why his audience has
begun to self-select for individuals for
whom that is a yearning and a calling mm
but that's not and and also I think
because he's in an environment he
perceives the chaos aspect has run amok
and has locked out a lot of the
orderliness stuff he's also presenting
an antidote he's presenting a lot of
more in the direction of orderliness and
more in the direction of
responsibilities because we're way off
track on that front to get us back onto
the way we're going to have to pick up a
lot more of that to get us back in but
it's not just that it's that's what is
more needful now you said children of
blue will will form their own collective
intelligence as to fight back against
this or to respond can you explain what
you mean by that
yeah in fact this is a good opportunity
maybe to double click on it so the first
thing is to is focusing on this fact
that it is precisely because a set of
values that were able to form an
alliance in cohere in the late latter
part of the 20th century and use the
modalities of the 20th century media and
collective intelligence landscape
broadcast television broadcast in
particular to win meaning that they were
able to establish
lish hegemony over the socio political
control structures they have not yet
been forced to adapt no straighforward
you don't you don't choose to adapt if
you don't have to and so because they
actually have high quality or reasonably
effective ways of trying to make sense
of the world and in particular making
choices and acting in the world they are
still operating under old frameworks and
have not had to and therefore have not
endeavored to learn the new tools ok so
this is what I characterize as the blue
church and primarily the blue church
problem that is that the the people the
human beings who have particular kinds
of values that are not fully compatible
with what's going on in red and
therefore I've not chosen to simply
shift their their alliances and their
energy and their attention into those
domains are constrained by the fact that
they're Earth's well allies broadly
speaking are still largely stuck in the
blue frameworks both in terms of
institutional structures and in terms of
sense making ideologies etc etc and as I
mentioned these are increasingly
delusional which is problematic because
when you're in delusion you actually
have a very hard time getting out of it
and what advice would you give to people
to to navigate this new world um well I
mean I've given advice already I've said
that it's keeps showing up and more
that's the same thing the first is free
your mind be aware of the fact that the
habits of the blue church and and how it
works don't work any more and so if it
feels scary to step into a liminal space
recognize that's ok that's what you need
to do step into a liminal space
recognize that your way of making sense
in the world that used to work don't
work and you really really need to set
yourself free to begin learning a new
child's mind beginner's mind second this
by nature must in fact the exploratory
so swim do not make sense prematurely in
spite of the fact that the world feels
dangerous inside of that you may want to
protect yourself in this dangerous world
doing so too quickly does not allow the
natural exploratory approach to do what
it needs to do really just listen and
learn go all the way dad back down to
human base turn it inward learn how fear
shows up in you learn how not to allow
fear to drive the choices that you make
learn how to listen to the whole way
that all of you perceives what's going
on become more integrated with your own
body go out into nature spend a lot of
time not connected to the chaos that's
going on and a lot of time reconnecting
yourself with your fundamental capacity
to perceive reality in all the different
modalities that human beings have the
capacity to do then relearn how to use
other human beings as allies in figuring
out how to make sense of the world I
mean that really relearned like we have
been abused and constrained by
institutional frameworks that remove us
from our own native capabilities so
relearn that understand how to be a
friend and an ally how to have a
conversation with somebody where you're
really listening closely to get a sense
of what their perspective brings to you
where you're not obligated to agree with
them we are not obligated to move out of
what you feel is right to form some new
consensus reality but where you're
actually authentically recognizing that
their perspective has some capacity to
bring richness to your perspective this
by the way is almost exclusively
possible in person and what we're doing
right now is an OK version of it but we
need to be very mindful the fact that
linear broadcast is bad and even
interactive bandwidth like this it's not
good enough you know you've got to learn
from raw physical and get yourself into
places where your consensus reality and
your habits are willfully destroyed
human-to-human conversations and and get
as far away from ideology as you can
your job is not to know what the is
going on your job is to be absolutely
certain that you have no idea what the
 is going on and learn how to feel
from raw chaos from raw uncertainty oh
then and only then are you finally able
to begin the journey of beginning to
form a collective intelligence in this
new environment that's my advice
great are you hopeful for the future
I am as it turns out someone who seems
to be relatively committed to
endeavouring to do good things even
under duress so it seems that I am
intrinsically hopeful for the future
even though at a rational analytic level
I would say that I do not have I would
not put the odds in our favor
check the website for more great films
such as the first full-length
documentary on Jordan Peterson and for
details of our upcoming events
[Music]
you