[Music]
you
[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meeting crisis so we are pursuing the
cognitive science of wisdom because
wisdom has always been associated with
meaning right from the axial revolution
onward so that's a deep reason wisdom of
course is also important for the
cultivation of enlightenment the
response to the perennial problems it's
also playing a central role in being
able to interpret our scientific world
view it way that allows us to respond to
the historical forces and so wisdom is
very important we took a look at we
continue to look at Magee and Barber and
we saw their convergence argument that
at the core of wisdom is the systematic
seeing through of Elysian and into
what's real and this is very much like
as the child is to the adult the adult
is to the sage and then two other
important aspects of it that wisdom is
much more with how you know then what
you know which means how you come to
know it and also how you interpret the
knowledge and that wisdom is in it
therefore in a related fashion deeply
perspectival and participatory and
that's why wisdom can be associated with
in important forms of pragmatic
self-contradiction we then noted the
connection with overcoming
self-deception in a systematic fashion
and the emphasis on wisdom on the
process rather than the products of
knowing and that both of those took us
into the work of Stanovich and because
he famously argues that one of the
hallmarks of rationality is valuing the
process rather than sorry not rather
than rather rating of the process in
addition to valuing of the products of
our cognition
and that took us also into the notion
the discussion of rationality and
Stanovich is a good bridge because hip
for him the notions of rationality and
ameliorating foolishness overlap very
strongly and we got into this notion of
and which I've been sort of
comprehensively arguing throughout this
course that rationality has to do with
the reliable and systematic overcoming
of self-deception and the potential
affording of flourishing by some process
of optimization of achieving our goals
with the caveat that as we try to
optimize we often change the change the
goals that we are pursuing one reason
being that we come to more and more
appreciate the value of of the process
as opposed to just the end result of the
process so in order to pursue that and
to deepen our notion of rationality and
thereby deepen our notion of wisdom and
of course wisdom has been associated
with rationality from the beginning
Socrates and Plato and Aristotle right
we took a look at the rationality debate
we saw I gave you three examples of many
possible examples experimental results
that seem to show reliably this kind of
thing very reliably no replication
crisis on this material so very Eliab
lis two things that people acquiesce
they acknowledge and accept the
authority of certain standards
principles of how they should reason and
yet they reliably fail to meet those
standards
and so one way to when possible
interpretation of that not the only
interpretation when possible
interpretation is that most people are
irrational in nature as I pointed out
because rationality is existential man
not just sort of abstract theoretical
concluding that people are irrational
has important implications for their
moral status their political status
their legal status even their
developmental status okay so this is
what I keep meaning what I am saying
rationality is deeply existential it is
not just theoretical okay we took a look
at one the beginning of what's called
the rationality debate and good science
always has good debate in it the
rationality debate and the argument it
was made by Cohen that human beings
can't be comprehensively irrational
because we have to ask this very
pertinent question where do standards
come from and the argument is the
standards have to come from us and how
do we come up with that normative theory
we come up with that normative theory
that acknowledges right the way we come
up with our normative theory is its
consonant with that we're the source of
our standards and this is the end this
is the idea that at the level of my
competence my competence contains all
the standards and that what I do in
order to get my normative theory is I
idealize awake all my performance errors
and this takes time it takes a lot of
reflection right until I get at the
underlying competence and then what I'm
doing when I'm proposing a normative
theory is I'm basically taking and
giving people this now explicate it
excavated account of the competence that
they possess and then demanding from
them that they do their best to reduce
the performance errors and meet that
confidence so we at the level of our
competence we are fundamentally rational
and all of the mistakes that people are
making in these experiments according to
Cohen are just performance errors
they're just performance errors
okay and just like you do not think I've
lost English because of all of my
performance errors you basically dismiss
them and read through them and attribute
to me the underlying competence the
Cohen is arguing we should read through
and dismiss these experimental results
and because the argument shows that
people must have the underlying
competence okay so how does stand of it
reply to this well in many places but I
think the best is Stanovich and west
2000 and behavioral and brain sciences
because the argument that this is a
really for me a gold standard of how you
do really good cognitive science the way
they integrate philosophical
psychological argumentation together for
example is really really really
impressive so stand of itchin West say
well if Cohen is right then all of the
errors that people are making our
performance errors and Cohen is invoking
the competence performance distinction
which of course goes back through you
know to Chomsky and and ultimately to
Piaget now let's remember Piaget because
we've talked about this well how do you
know how do you distinguish the child's
right speech deficit from the drunkards
right the drunker it is giving
performance error but we think the child
actually her competence for example is
not sufficiently developed why do we
think that why do we think when the
children are making all these
conservation errors right that that
reflects something about their
competence at that point
well that's because competence errors
that reflect a defect or a deficit in
competence are systematic errors that's
precisely how Piaget did his work right
that's precisely how you would determine
that if I got brain damaged and I'm
leaving out like my sentences or broke
that it is not performance error because
my errors would be systematic across
different context different times of day
different tasks I'd be making these
mistakes performance errors are not
systematic right so if I if my speech is
broken because I'm rushing right it's
not going to be broken when I'm not
rushing if my speech is broken when I'm
tired it's not going to be broken when
I'm not tired so this is
circumstantially driven right and as the
circumstances change the patterns of
error will change and go all over the
place
so these errors are not systematic in
nature okay well that means we have a
reliable way of telling whether or not
the errors that the people are making in
the experiments are performance errors
or not how do you see if errors are
systemic well this is what you do
errors are systematic if when I make
this error it's highly predictive that
I'll make this error it's highly
predictive that I make this error it's
highly predictive that I'll make this
error so if a child is showing
conservation in this task that's
predictive that they'll fail to show
conservation right in this task in this
task in this task right so the degree to
which we've talked about this before the
degree to which there's a positive
manifold remember when we talked about
general intelligence the degree to which
your performance in one task is
predictive of how you'll do on other
tasks if you have a manifold in your
performance if there's if the errors are
systematic across many different tasks
that you're performing then that's
evidence that the errors are systemic
rather than not systematic okay so
that's easy enough so then what we can
do is we can and we've got all this data
we can look at people doing these
different experiments we and many
experiments that doing multiple versions
the same participant is doing one task
rinna so what we can do is the following
we can see if if I for example if I make
a failure in critical detachment does
that mean that all
I'll also tend to show belief for
severance does that also mean that I'll
tend to leap to the wrong conclusion
when I was doing the task art you know
the the lily pads covering the pond and
the answer and this is what there is
overwhelming evidence for is yes the
errors you make are systematic they're
systematic and see so now Santa bitching
let's say ah Cohen's argument predicts
that the errors are performance errors
that's what he claims that means that
the errors should be not systematic but
what we find is overwhelming convincing
evidence that the errors that people are
making and all these tasks are
systematically related together so these
are errors at the level of competence
and now you go right and this is what I
mean about good debate makes something
problematic right because there's
something right about Cohen's argument
in standard which acknowledges it right
there's something right in that we have
to be the source right of our standards
and yet caught Cohen's conclusion that
all the errors are performance errors is
wrong it's it's undeniably wrong how do
we put these together well you put these
together
and you can see Stanovich and waste
doing this to varying degrees you put
this together by stepping back and
looking at an assumption that's in
Cohen's argument it's an assumption
about the competence Cohen is assuming
that that competence for rationality is
a single competence he's assuming that
that competence is static
right he's also assuming that the
competence is completely individualistic
okay I'll come back to this one much
later I'm going to address these two
because Stanovich really doesn't talk
about this so remember that but we'll
come back to it later
think about the Platonic idea what if I
have two competences that both are
working towards getting me to reliably
achieve my goals correct my own behavior
but these competencies could actually
conflict with each other
that would mean I would be the source of
all the standards here all the standards
here here are all the standards here I
am all I'm the source for all the
standards but at the level of my
competence I can be generating error
because these two competencies can
actually be in conflict with each other
so one of this the one the way you start
to resolve this debate and this has
become a central idea in psychology
cognitive psychology and cognitive
science is that we don't have a single
competency we have to have multiple
competencies and what that means is and
this is why for example assuming and
critically uncritically assuming that
you could reduce rationality and
identify it with the single competence
of syllogistic reasoning is just
fundamentally wrong it's not paying
attention to the science
here's another issue Cohen is assuming
that your competence is full-blown it's
finished it's static it's done but and I
sort of slipped this in notice the
examples I used of small children their
competence for example in English or
whatever language they're speaking I
just happen to be speaking English
that's why I'm using it the little girl
that the two and a half year old her
competence is not fully developed she
will come to have the standards as that
competency fully develops but as that
competency is immature she can be a
source of error from her competence so
right we have to give up the assumption
that our competence again is static why
would it be your cognition is inherently
dynamic and developmental again assuming
oh no this is just what it is right and
assuming that there is a single thing
we're pointing to when we point to
rationality is a mistake see this way
Stanovich and West can say and it's
brilliant right it's brilliant they
could say Cohen's argument is
fundamentally right but his conclusion
that the specific conclusion is wrong
because the conclusion that the errors
are only performance errors is only a
conclusion based on the hidden premise
right that the competence is single and
static you have multiple competencies
and they're in ongoing development okay
so that's we've learned something very
interesting so what's happening is
instead of itches an advocate of this
right you have dual processing models
this is the idea that we have different
ways of processing information think of
how platonic this is how much Plato was
going I told you this a long time ago
right we have different styles ways of
processing information and that are good
for different kinds of problem-solving
and those and
neither one of these competencies can be
right exclusive or sufficient for us but
they have right ultimately a
complimentary relationship a
relationship I would argue of opponent
processing when Stanovich has a
different view it will come back to that
a little bit later okay second person in
the debate and you've heard me mention
him and you've heard me talk about him
with serious respect and he has given to
her his respect by Stanovich and with
charniak has a much different approach
to the rationality debate he agrees with
Stanovich and west that the difficulty
is not at the level of our performance
and that's the level of our competence
but he has a different move to make he
has a move that you see you saw me
invoke last time this is the odd implies
can so this is the question whether or
not right whether or not we're applying
the right normative theory to people in
these experiments when we're judging
them to be irrational
so cherni I can Vokes something that you
saw me invoke multiple times when we
talked about relevance realization we're
in the finitary predicament this is
actually his term right we could not
because it is combinatorially explosive
derive make derive all the implications
we cannot consider all of our
assumptions all of the stuff that we've
talked about before we cannot go back
and recreate all of the ways in which
we've represented something this is
combinatorially explosive what we do
right do we just arbitrarily choose
whatever implication we want no so
here's the point right we can't be
algorithmic right we can't use standards
that work in terms of certainty and
completeness because for example if I
tried to be comprehensively deductively
logical then I would engage I would fall
very rapidly into combinatorial
explosion for any problem that I'm
trying to solve and I would then have
committed
cognitive suicide it cannot be a
standard a normative standard of
rationality if trying to follow it would
commit me to cognitive suicide which
would undermine any attempt to satisfy
any of my goals to see what journey I
could saying right you can't do this but
of course you don't just arbitrarily
choose whatever representation you want
choose whatever inference you want
choose to check whatever contradiction
you want so you can't check them all and
you can't just arbitrarily and before
and it's one that I write you do
relevance you picked the relevant
implications you check the relevant
contradictions you check right which
aspects of your representation you
consider relevant etc you do relevance
realization and Stanovich is like yeah
that's right we're not going to argue
with that and that's part of what I've
been arguing throughout there's this
consensus on how central this ability is
at least it's an emerging consensus
Herbert Simon from New Orleans Simon you
know talks about bounded rationality
that we can't be purely computational
algorithmic etc for all of the reasons
we've already explored these or and then
what Changi Act says is but look what
people are using in the experiments
they're using formal logic they're using
formal probability theory they're using
all these formal purely algorithmic by
the way you say oh but probability
certainly doesn't work in certainty yes
it does it gives you certainty about
probabilities that's what makes it a
formal theory that's why it has axioms
and theorems etc okay
don't confuse properties of the theory
with properties of what the theory is
about so what Jenny Act says is the
scientists in the experiment are using
all these formal theories that can only
be
applied in very limited contexts if I
try to apply them comprehensively in my
life and that's where rationality
matters because rationality is an
existential issue if I try to apply it
comprehensively in my life from within
the finitary predicament I am doomed to
fail and then you're laying an art on me
that I cannot possibly meet which means
you scientists have the wrong normative
theory because if you're laying a
normative theory on me that I cannot
possibly meet that's evidence that it's
the wrong normative theory and that's
journey X argument it's a powerful
argument it's a good argument it's an
argument I take very seriously so does
Stanovich and West they go yes all of
this is right however Chani ak is
talking about he thinks he's talking
about one thing and he's actually
talking about another and this is such a
clever response and it's going to tell
us something really really important
right okay first of all this tells you
that you again
here's another argument why you can't
equate rationality with merely being
logical merely using probability theory
right does that mean I can be arbitrary
and ignore logic no it's the much more
difficult and notice how this starts to
overlap with wisdom it's a much more
difficult issue of knowing when where
and to what degree I should use logic
and probability in a formal manner etc
okay
how does stand a virtue and West reply
again I think it's brilliant they say
all of this is right but it's not about
rationality all of this right all of
this stuff they tend to talk about in
terms they use the phrase computational
limitations they always describe it sort
of negatively instead of positively
instead of relevance realization
although the two are inter defined they
always talk about it in terms of
computational limitations but they say
all this stuff that chair niak is
talking about in terms of computational
limitations is actually not about
rationality it's actually about
intelligence now this is gonna be a
brilliant move and what its gonna also
show us is there's a D and I said
there's a while ago if there's a deep
difference between being intelligent and
being rational in fact Stanovich is
gonna argue that what makes you foolish
is you're highly intelligent and highly
irrational and that is going to make
sense right of what we've already argued
that the very processes that make me
adaptively intelligent are the very
processes that also subject me to
self-deception
how does he do this well he basically
argues and you saw an analogous argue
how did they do this and how does
television do it elsewhere right
basically argue ah right when we test
for people's ability to zero in on
relevant information right how what how
can we test to see how well people deal
with computational limitations
so what Stanovich basically argues is
and again myself and Leo farrago of Leo
Ferrara argued this in a convergent
fashion other people right basically
what we're testing when we're testing
people's intelligence is we're testing
their capacity to deal with
computational limitations and this lines
up again also you've heard me mention
this the measures of intelligence
correlate with measures of working
memory and blah blah blah are giving you
all that argument stand of itch is
giving you an additional argument here
he's saying okay
so we understand intelligence as the
capacity to deal with computational
limitations that's negative way of
putting it I would say it's the capacity
to do relevance realization but let's
keep going and then we have a way of
therefore measuring people's capacity to
deal with computational limitations so
chair niak is saying people fail in the
experiment because of computational
limitations there in the finitary
predicament and we have a way of
measuring how well people can deal with
computational limitations
that's intelligence we have a way of
measuring G reliable robust way of
measuring G so now notice what we can do
again so brilliant right we have
reliable ways of measuring G remember
what he what stand of itch and Weston
was showed with answer to Cohen that all
of the reasoning tasks also form a pause
strong and manifold they don't label
anything but I'm gonna call it R there's
right sort of gr all right there's this
general factor of reasoning because the
reasoning tasks form a strong positive
manifold okay so what we can do is we
can measure the G of our right and now
we can do something very very very basic
if what's happening in the experiment is
a measure of rationality and rationality
is equivalent to dealing with
combinatorial explosion computational
limitations then these two should
approach parody intelligence and
rationality should be identical right so
notice what what's going on here if
cherni AK is right then rationality and
intelligence would be identical and
there would be a strong relationship
between how intelligent you are and how
well you do on these experiments and
this is again where good science
reliable robust well replicated lots of
convert decades the relationship here is
at best 0.3 so you know that correlation
goes from zero to one where zeros no
correlation and one is very strong
correlation 0.3 intelligence what this
clearly shows is that intelligence is
necessary but nowhere near sufficient
for being rational so here's two things
that are insufficient for making you
rational just being very intelligent and
just being able to use logic the science
is actually clear on this so notice
notice how a lot of the ways our culture
has tried to understand rationality are
now coming into question we right
oh well rationality is equivalent think
of descartes now you see my Descartes is
wrong of course right of logic allottee
well that turns out to be false
oh well rationality is the same thing as
being really smart really intelligent
right nope that turns out to be false Oh
what is that then what is that then so
now we're starting to do good science
right we're starting to get away from
common sense which sudden you have some
humility we're starting to it's now a
real problem well what is it what is it
and it gives us a guy a way of like
talking about what we've been talking
about through the very processes that
make you intelligent can actually cause
you to be irrational there is no
contradiction in saying you're highly
intelligent and highly irrational not at
all
so now we have to ask ourselves well
what's the missing piece so let's
remember that we've got an important
question that we need to ask an answer
what's the missing piece for rationality
what's missing something else is going
on and that missing piece is going to
tell us quite a bit I think about the
overlap between wisdom and rationality
now there's a third argument and it's an
important argument because it's also
going to connect to the issue of
understanding which is again a crucial
feature of wisdom now stand a fiction
let's talk about this argument but they
don't cite an individual who actually
came up with the argument explicitly I
think it's just because I don't think
there's any fraud I think they just
didn't read it because the person was
the person I'm going to talk about is
Medlen and the article is from the
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology in
1970 so you know it's impossible to read
everyone everywhere at all times again
we are in the finitary predicament buts
Medlin pointed out something that
Stanovich and west do take seriously and
because medellin makes an explicit and
clear argument for it we should pay
attention to what he says he says well
there's a difficulty with easy so this
is the third response we've had Cohen
we've had chair niak and now a response
that I will attribute to smellin
Stanovich and West don't but they should
but again no no crime on their part
okay so Aslan says well there's a
difficulty with interpreting the
experiments again that's the issue
always the issue of interpretation and
you can't do an experiment to decide the
interpretation because then you have to
do right then you have to interpret that
experiment you can't experiment your way
out of interpretation interpretation is
always going to be needed in science and
that means theoretical debate is always
going to be needed
okay so back to the theoretical debate
sense it says now interpreting these
experiments relies on a distinction
between a fallacy and a misunderstanding
because there's two ways in which I can
give the wrong answer
one is I write I interpret the problem
correctly I understand it but then I
reason incorrectly and that's why I get
the wrong answer so the fault in a
fallacy fallacious reasoning is this is
where the error comes in the poor
reasoning a reason incorrectly but
there's another way in which I can give
the wrong answer to get to the same
conclusion
with the wrong answer well what is it I
actually reason correctly in a normative
fashion but I've understood the problem
incorrectly
all right and that's a misunderstanding
somebody misunderstands us the error
comes in because they've interpreted the
problem they've understood the problem
incorrectly but once once you give them
that right incorrect interpretation
there there's nothing wrong with their
reasoning there's nothing wrong with
their reasoning okay okay great
so there's two places we can get there's
two equally good explanations for why we
produce the wrong answers
one is we reason incorrectly and that's
a fallacy because we've got correct
interpretation the other one is we are
reasoning correctly there's nothing
wrong with our reasoning but we've
understood the problem incorrectly and
that's a misunderstanding right and
that's okay so this distinction is
really crucial because right this
distinction is really crucial keeping
these apart is really crucial because
the if we want to conclude that people
are irrational we have to be attributing
to them fallacious cognition not pure
sorry not sorry
oh wow where did Pierre come wait we
have to attribute to them fallacious
cognition not some kind of distortion in
the communication that they've
misunderstood us one of the ways in
which people typically often avoid self
criticism avoiding the possibility that
they might have reasoned correctly is to
always claim that they have merely being
misunderstood they misunderstood look
for that in somebody look for somebody
who never says ah right my argument is
wrong I did it wrong look for somebody
who always says no no I've been
misunderstood yeah because they're
basically trading on this in an
equivocal fashion they're bullshitting
you in a way okay so no sometimes they
should say I've been misunderstood
totally sometimes but sometimes they
should say
I reasoned wrong okay let's get back to
this okay so far so good right
but then medicine said but this is
difficult because these things aren't
independent the way we need them to be
what what I mean the attribution of
fallacy or the attribution of
misunderstanding are not independent the
way we need them to be in order to
cleanly interpret the experimental
results as showing that people are
largely in gating engaging in fallacious
reasoning well why so smitherland does
something and of course I think it's
preliminary but we'll have to come back
to it
right which is give a preliminary
account of understanding and he
basically says well what is it to
understand something and he says well to
understand X we asked people to give us
something that's identical to acts well
let's use arrows here
to acts we asked us to give us something
that contradicts acts right we asked us
to give things that X implies and these
are all of course related because
identity as a kind of implication
contradiction as a failure of
implication and then we also asked them
to give us things that are relevant to X
now there it is again
uh-huh I would also add by the way
because when you look at further
research and understanding people talk
about it not only what what is relevant
to X but also what is X relevant to and
I don't thinks Medellin would it would
object to that but here's the here's
relevance again of course ok so what's
the problem
ah now put this one aside and SMED Flynn
just sort of puts it aside in his
argument and of course that's something
I'm not going to sort of let sit by he
puts aside this he says well ignoring
that look at these three the way we
determine if somebody has understood us
is we determine we determine if they
have drawn the identities we would draw
draw the contradictions we have drawn
drawn the implications we've drawn right
so somebody understands us if they
reason the way that we do
so what's medicine says this is what the
scientists are assuming the scientists
are assuming that the participants in
the experiment have understood the
problem sorry right have understood the
problem correctly and then reason
incorrectly but notice how this is a
pragmatic contradiction because if
they've understood the problem correctly
then they reason the way the scientist
does in this very difficult task of
interpreting a problem
then but then they reason in the way the
scientist does it when they're actually
trying to solve the problem and that's
problematic in fact couldn't I say this
couldn't I say the fact that the right
participants in the experiment are
consistently producing the wrong answer
is good evidence that they are
misunderstanding the problem people are
reliably misunderstanding these problems
well that can't be because their
scientists made them what scientists
can't be making mistakes scientists
can't miss misunderstand community what
do you what are you tributing to science
is godlike Authority now stick with the
argument here right you can you could
you can conclude that they're making the
fallacy but it's it's sort of like you
have to say for some reason right at
this really difficult problem of
interpreting what I'm saying their
reasoning very correctly and then when
they go to solve the problem their
reasoning poorly or you can say right
their reasoning correctly but they've
misunderstood the poem but that also
means that their reasoning poorly or
maybe or maybe I've misrepresented or
miscommunicated the problem see it's not
so much more problematic
okay so two things to note here two
important things to note first of all we
got to come back to this because there
here's here's there's an opening here
Constanta vision West because they
haven't read smudged linen because they
don't have this so clearly explicate it
they can't sort of pick up on that so
I'm not criticizing them for not seeing
this right right but they do come up
with a very important point and this go
and this is convergent with their
argument against Cohen they argue for
this they argue in order to break this
impasse we need a normativity on Const
rule we need a normativity on how people
interpret make sense of size up the
situation of the problem that's what
construal means basically we need a
normativity on how they formulate the
problem and this has to be an
independent normativity independent of
what independent of inferential norms
right if I try to use inference as my
stand
good inference is my standard for doing
this I'll fall into this circle I have
to be evaluate I have to be able to
evaluate control independently of
evaluating how people make inferences
that's the only way I'm gonna break out
of this but that's okay because that
means but Stanovich doesn't take this as
deeply as they should but that means
that there's a non inferential aspect to
rationality that is central there's an
aspect of rationality that has to do
with understanding with control that is
non inferential in nature and that of
course points back to this because
relevance is pre and parental the way
you formulate your problems remember
that has to do with relevance
realization and that is something that
is pre inferential in nature so we can
actually put this together very cleanly
I would argue we can say now see what
Stanovich and West's say is okay we need
this normative EVDO and control it has
to be independent of our inferential
normativity and then they go ah we don't
know what this is what could it be what
that normativity of construal would look
like it's oh right and it's like granted
but here's a proposal
right I think it's a proposal that sort
of it's it's clearly a right presented
to us from a lot of the arguments we've
already considered right we do have a
normativity on control we have standards
of what a good problem formulation is
versus a bad problem formulation where
do we study that normativity in
psychology
well we study it in insight
problem-solving we know right
what a bad problem formulation is a bad
problem formulation is one that puts you
into a combinatorially explosive search
space a bad problem formulation is one
that does not turn your ill-defined
problem into a well-defined problem a
bad problem formulation is one in which
you are not paying careful attention to
how salience is misleading you so that
that's telling us something really
interesting right that there is in it in
addition to inference being crucial to
being rational insight is crucial to
being rational too because if what we
mean by insight is somebody who is good
at formulating problems avoiding
combinatorial explosion of waiting
ill-defined administering salience
misdirection
right then being insightful is going to
be central to being rational it's not
going to be something that comes up out
of the irrational aspects of the psyche
it comes it comes in from the Noren and
Forenza but why should we be identifying
nobody is here
identifying rationality with just a pure
logical normativity on inference so what
I propose to you is that we need to
understand the role of both insight and
inference in rationality and that's much
more problematic but we need that
because we need to integrate rationality
and understanding together in a
integrated account and notice how now
more and more rationality and wisdom are
starting to overlap for us in a serious
way because if I now get rationality and
understanding inference and insight in
meshed together then of course I'm
starting to talk more and more and
having to happen in a systematic and
reliable way I'm starting to talk more
and more about the ways when we talk
about how people are wise if we give up
thinking of rationality as being like
mr. Spock or mr. data and we give up you
know the the idea that being rational is
just being really smart then we start to
get into the problematic notion of
rationality and we need the idea of
multiple competencies we need the
distinction between being logical and
being rational being intelligent being
rational and we have to understand that
there's an important component of
rationality that is non inferential in
nature it has to do with a normativity
of on construal the generation of
insight not a normativity of
argumentation and the generation of
inference
right and that's important that's really
important
so the issue of control is acknowledged
but not in any way resolved by Stanovich
so it's not going to play although it
should given the his own arguments it's
not going to play a significant role in
his theory of rationality
what is that theory what does it look
like what is the missing piece according
to Stanovich so we said right that
intelligence is not predictive or an
only weakly predictive of right
rationality these are not equivalent
and along the way we got yet another
argument for intelligence being
relevance realization okay that's all
good what is the missing piece then the
relationship here is only 0.3 what
accounts for most of the variance then
as a scientist would say so Stanovich
argues very clearly for what he calls a
cognitive style well this term is
equipped is a bit equivocal it's used in
slightly different ways in psychology
for different things and he also invokes
the notion of bad mind where
inappropriate psycho tech so that's also
in there so there's there's sort of
cognitive styles in psycho tact that can
both be part of the missing variants so
what part here is the psycho tech you're
using right you can have poor what he
calls mind where which is like software
he's picking up on the psycho tech idea
here all right and then the other and
this is what often gets given more
priority because it accounts for a lot
is an appropriate cognitive style the
difference between these are not as as
it's clear I think at the end of it
seems to think they are so we'll have to
come back to that when we come back to
relationship between psycho technology
and wisdom so what's what's what's the
cognitive style so a cognitive style is
an act is something you can learn at
least as Stanovich is using it and it's
to learn a set of sensitivities and
skills notice the procedure allottee and
the perspectival in here but it's it's
implicit it's in the background right
but what is the cognitive style that's
most predictive of doing well on the
reasoning test he gets this from
Jonathan Barron this is the notion of
active open mindedness
and when you see this you're going to
see a lot of stoicism here and this
overlaps a lot with the cognitive
behavioral therapy that right that is
derived from stoicism and again that's
convergent that's not by design or
deliberate and that tells you something
something crucial is being senior what
is active open mindedness so active open
mindedness is to train yourself to look
for these patterns of self-deception to
look for biases okay so here's a bias
you've heard me mention you've heard me
mention some of these the confirmation
bias or right the essentialism bias
right or the representational ism or the
availability misusing the availability
heuristic notice that a bias is just a
heuristic misused we've talked about
this so this is I tend to only look for
information that confirms my beliefs
right this is I tend to treat any
category as pointing to an essence
shared by all the members and maybe we
should give up an essential ism of
sacredness or at least in the terms of
its content I've already suggested that
to you the availability heuristic is the
availability biases I judge some things
probability by how easily I can remember
it or imagine it happening we've talked
about all of these there's many of these
so what do I do
first of all I have to do the science I
learn about all of these alright so this
comes from Barron I want to point out
something that Stan a bitch doesn't say
as clearly as Barron does so what I do
is I learn about these and I sensitize
myself I sensitize myself and this is
like a virtue because I have to care
about the process not just the result i
sensitize myself to looking for these
biases in my day-to-day cognition
and then I actively counteract them I
actively say no no I'm doing
confirmation bias I need to look for
potential information that will dis
confirm it and here's where you can now
begin to also give up the
individualistic assumption of competence
part of the way in which I can be
rationally competent is I can ask you to
help me overcome my confirmation bias
because it's very hard for me to look
for information that this confirms my
beliefs it's much easier for you and
then if I practice with you and not your
eye scan start to internalize you and I
can start to get better at looking for
my own instances where I fall prey to
the confirmation bias so I now actively
counteract those that's sort of where
Stanovich leaves it barren points out
right but you don't overdo this because
if you overdo this you will start to
choke on the tsunami of combinatorial
explosion that it will overwhelm you so
again you have to do this and you have
to do this to the right degree and that
becomes much more nebulous and again
again we're starting to shade over into
wisdom right so what you should then ask
is what predicts if being intelligent
doesn't predict right if intelligence
predicted rationality then and being
intelligent would predict how well
you've cultivated active open-mindedness
but of course it doesn't so what is it
about people that predicts how well they
will cultivate active open mindedness
and this is the degree to which people
have a need for cognition this is people
who problematize things they create
problems they look for problems they go
out and on their own try to learn I
would add to that there's two aspects to
need for cognition there is a curiosity
in which I need to have more information
so that I can manipulate things
effectively and that's important people
that are in that sense more curious and
want to solve problems not just gather
facts but solve problems because that's
what needs for cognition points to
that's important but also think about
how important wonder is right how much
it opens you up to putting into question
your entire worldview your deeper sense
of identity deep need for cognition and
that's relevant to do because
rationality is ultimately an existential
issue not just a theoretical inferential
logical issue so what we're going to
need to do is to come back and look more
about at standing bitch's account of
rationality some criticisms of it and
then on the basis of that because we've
already overlapping with it so much take
a look at some of the key theories of
the nature of wisdom and try to draw
that together into a viable account of
wisdom which we then can then integrate
with the account of enlightenment thank
you very much for your time and
attention
[Music]
you
you