okay we are recording yeah so that that
you know what used for the the people we
just press recording I what were we
talking about before was just this sense
of what you and John have been working
with and I've been what I've been loving
reading I anytime you want to include me
on the stuff that you're writing and in
Google Docs or whatever oh it's gonna
happen it's gonna happen
yeah yeah I seem to be like reading
through it but just that just a sense of
this what what you've been talking about
with the distinction suchness and and
the more Ness great was just John's I
should say properly like that particular
way of formulating that's all in that
sense of where it's like it's definitely
my experience of where was circling
going so deep into someone's suchness
and right in that moment it's almost as
if you could talk about the infinity of
the cosmos right because what you're so
present to and presents by right like is
so on one level so intimately you need
the unique something that you conceived
right of them and what that does on one
level it's like very very very very
personal but at the same time it's like
so easy to like scale totally up and
talk about infinity right and then to
switch back that there's something about
dialogue oh s--- winning um when it's
really genuine and in presents itself
that just seems to bring both of those
together right in such a way and he said
you're saying like you know a lot of and
actually was a lot a bunch of our
conversation is talking about this
phenomena of you know what where you
don't feel like it or whatever move
right you're predisposed over there's
not myself talking about that a lot
lately and I wonder what that says we
want to do is be around people and talk
to somebody or whatever and then yeah
and then like this experience of just
kind of innocence and surrendering your
will to the activity and at some point
it catches right and you your will
actually catches and it becomes given by
the activity and go into a flow state
yeah
and then you said this thing that was
really interesting is is like I bet in
the more that you experience
dialo goes right in that possibility the
harder and harder it is to say no to die
logos right but even if you can't feel
it right barely remember it right that
you know that if you just show up and
you start engaging right that if like
fate permits like it'll cast its spell
on you which you want it to absolutely
that's what it's what it's what brings a
lot of people to church every week is
that person feeling I think obviously
we're talking about orders of magnitude
of difference here but fundamentally I
think it's the same kind of phenomena
exactly yeah so just thinking about the
pups that you know and some level
there's the and and I just want to put
this in your ear right and just see what
you think about this cuz I don't know if
I totally understand it completely
well I know I don't understand it
completely but you know with talking
with you Honus about his teacher wrote a
book called the weirdness of being it's
a very difficult book I mean he's like
he's a you G&R oh I think is his name
he's he's Italian and he was Johannes
his teacher
Gennaro Venera it sounds right yeah I
really like that guy
yes intensely he's intensely what I
imagine Heidegger to be kind of be like
right in terms of thinking like the
practices in the rigor of the thought
and the thinking but
fluid at the same time anyways he's
talking about that he this book is
really central like as far as I can tell
is really central around him trying to
reveal a fundamental miss a
misapprehension of what Heidegger was
talking about and and what he was saying
is that like you know the notion of what
what gets translated is possibility
right in Heidegger right in possibility
you could say is like like Heidegger's
thing was we say Hegel was all about
actuality right in Heidegger was like no
a big thing about it is like no it's
like what Trump's actuality and what
even calls it into being actual is is
the possibility or the future or that
sense of things right but reading this
book he he's really showing how when
Heidegger says whatever a word he says
in German that gets translated in
possibility is he's taken is taken
really from the Roman sense of
possibility which means to kind of take
or to grab hold of something it has kind
of more of a a dominant like going after
something like realizing your
possibilities right something you grab
but where Heidegger was taking it it was
really like a mistranslation on on a
very deep level because he said that
actually it comes from a root of
something that means to to like it means
like and like to like or to love and
that actually this sense of being or the
sense of possibility right it's more
like it likes you right it it that's our
kind of phenomenological experience is
that we in a certain sense being or
possibility or that dimension of being
right as a phenomena is in a certain
sense a liking
sign right or being there and I just I
was like wow like when I started to get
that do something in me went up just to
think about that of like that no we
don't like even with daya logos it's
it's not like we know about a
possibility right that we then move
towards because we think it's possible
it's more like it I work at the sense of
like the possibility actually is moved
by us in a certain sense it reaches
toward us right and that's how we
actually end up in this relationship
with it
right right and I was just thinking
about that was like deilogos of in
anything I experienced with like
ultimately what I end up moving towards
there is a sense of just there's
something about whatever it is that I
don't quite understand but the some
possibility is keeps getting hold of me
alright so it's like as we mean as we
mean toward the world it tends to mean
back toward us and I think that's it's
kind of catches traction a little bit
with some of the mm-hmm
some of the features of Heidegger that
Ally him with pragmatism I think in some
ways right that catches the
transgenerational with the revelation of
the worlds that becomes so affected
right he logos right and that it's like
it's reaching towards us there's
something about that reversal or like a
reverse this sense in which I was
thinking about it and so when I kind of
got it all of a sudden I was like oh
it's really about you know uh no
different any different level it's like
really the position of love and the
primacy of love ray yes it's the
difference between encountering and yet
being encountered
it seems to happen in this practice that
we're talking about it seems to happen
that we find ourselves encountered and
in being so encountered we're also
disclosed in the encounter right because
because we're conferring re-built our
egoic identity onto or into a dynamic
that's transpersonal right I think we
experience ourselves as being
encountered by the dynamic with which we
now identify because we now identify
with this dynamic symbolically we can be
so encountered in a way that seems not
of our person Retta cisely right that is
both intimate and yet
yeah not personal to the contents of ego
and the way that we usually think about
it I guess that's what I guess that's
why my understanding of like the the the
original notion of education that goes
back into Greece like the first
announcements of that had less to do
with the less to do with like now we
usually think about being educated is
like you know the student is a little
vessel and you just fill it up with
stuff right but you no sense of it was
more like to be educated to be seized
right be seized by something right like
possessed in some way or and there was a
complete look like as you as you say do
you can't you cannot know without being
known and you cannot be known by being
without being changed by being known
right yeah yeah that's right that's
right that's right and then I think then
India logan-san philosophiae you're
being made a character of knowing right
you're it's like being made a character
in a narrative suddenly your hand is
guided by the narrative it's not guided
by your agency per se
right you partake of the very thing of
which you now possessed and there's a
reciprocity to it so it's it might be
deterministic and yet but but it's
determinism involves a kind of
sacramental submission yeah - it's -
it's making of you right right it's as
though you surrender yourself to be made
yeah totally yeah leave it leave it it
breathes us yeah that's right
that's right and then of course the
midwifery metaphor it comes back into
play with that I think - yeah well yeah
were thought like thought because you
both become conceived you conception
conceived yeah yeah and then that says
also that enjoyment intimates the role
of love - as you say alright you have to
that you're in that being in folded into
it as being unfolded into relation the
way we characterize that relation is a
relation of love right the poetic form
of love yeah it's yeah yeah of course
education per se has been pretty
dispossessed of love as part of its as
part of its its its mo that was yeah
that's I think its central and and
that's what I think it's what do logos
reintroduces precisely really what
dealer was reintroduces which is why
beginning interpersonally is so
essential right because you have to
spark that / that has there there has to
be an emergence of love before that love
can then be transmuted mens become and
be and then become the the symbolizing
vessel that then recreates the
relationship and and evolves it into
something an acog ik in the way that we
know day logos combines
right right that the horizontality of
the interpersonal and the verticality of
the ontological it's love trade as that
may sound it's love that that love is
the point of convergence which is also
the point of emergence yeah of that
dynamic rank because that is that
there's the agape mmm-hmm that's
precisely it right
there's the agape yeah it says like the
way the John puts that have like it it
it birds people a person right and be so
deeply seeing them like birds them in a
sense that's right but it's like that's
the that's but then then it goes into is
it looks what's the one that naturally
goes into is a fight
Ilia yeah well fight this it's
interesting because finally if I Lia is
the collective contexture of dialogue is
why Lia write Phi Lia is it's sort of
default context right that's why I and
and phyleus seems to be seems to be
instrumental in in alchemy seing the
wandering arrows into the poesis of
agave but then there's a reciprocity
that seems to happen even with the agave
once conduced because with the 'got
because it's almost as though you know
the people gather we were to return
momentarily to our campfire metaphor
right people gather around the fire and
then they actually in their their that
it's like the formally the formation of
their particular concert is the Phi Lea
but their attraction to it their
infraction to one another and through
one another is the arrows that they've
come with come prepared with a always
already air us that puts them into
relation with being even before they are
in the formal relation of Phi Lea and
what the formal relation of finally it
does is it midwife's agape for
the interpenetrating arrows within the
dia logos but then and then the emergent
entity what we've called sort of the
third factor or John and I called the
guys in the chapter we wrote about it is
that the Geist then becomes the kind of
intermediary between work or calling
suchness
and more nasai it is precisely the
dialectical spirit that mediates the
relation between the open water of the
inexhaustible and a particular structure
of the suchness of that particular
encounter yes and then the Geist as that
demonic hermetic intermediary is then
then then midwife's us back through the
dynamic so it's like we are created by
the very thing that our that our
cultivated eros creates before us right
and so then there's a dialectic
reciprocity in the poesis of the
dialogue itself it's not just a
reciprocity between the part that the
die ologists the participants but it's a
reciprocity between each individual and
the entity that emerges warm through the
reservoir it's sort of so it's like an
Ana gothic reciprocity it's a
reciprocity that evolves from
interpersonal reciprocity to a
reciprocity with the open endedness of
being correct right totally and then and
that and so that that opening
reciprocity is reciprocal open it would
be appropriate enough right mark Lewis's
turn or John's riff on our closest term
then becomes a way of understanding the
an agog of dynamic of de Lobos right
because you start one kind of reciprocal
opening and it actually tilts and
unfolds in Jim a into an ontology of
reciprocity
right right right so your relate so
being in relation with others to terms
you are being in relation with being
yeah totally so in some way right so the
practice of D logos right like walk
why practice a why practice Socratic
platonic dialogue right is this sense of
internalizing something right where and
I think you've said this before and this
is what this is a little bit what you've
been writing about - I think you and
John I've been writing together is about
this sense of the internal deilogos that
it's it's the yellow ghosts that can be
embodied in a relationship or in a group
of people but then there's there's the a
front like the deal logos dialogic can
be a BB in your perception of a tree
like with with a dream that there's a
there's a that it can catch and become
internalized and be the way in which you
reach out to the world in the world
reach out to you that that can be
infused right that's right that's right
exactly and I think that has to do with
the way that this the weight of such
nosov a particular whether we might call
it a particular perceptor a particular
entity of being the way it's such nice
becomes possessed of more there's a
there's a metaphor that and I've taken
to thinking certainly it's not an
original ideas motif has been around for
a long time but I've taken to thinking
about it as the relation between sound
and silence I think I've mentioned that
maybe once or twice before but but I I
was thinking about that and then I came
across the passage of James William
James in his principles of psychology I
think and he and he uses a very similar
metaphor pragmatically of a thunderclap
and the relationship that the
thunderclap has with the backdrop of
silence into which it dissolves right
and and the idea that you cannot know
the thunderclap independent from the
back drag that's obviously is verging
into Heidegger and there's a reason why
those two particular modes of thinking
are so fine right but but
that the thunderclap cannot be known
independently from the silence into
which it sinks and against which it is
known and heard and resonates and and so
that to me is precisely a way of
metaphorically capturing the dialectical
relationship between the the embodied
suchness and its capacity to to to mean
itself more to mean itself more the
thunderclap can somehow mean itself more
by becoming more enveloping of the very
silence that it closes it yeah and that
and that and that perforates it hmm
so that dialects of the dialectical
relation between such and more is
something that is that is symbolized in
the dialectical relation with vow right
because thou is precisely thou is a
Convenant of being that consists of both
such and more when known as thou when
known impossibility right and so then
that that's I think one of the reasons
why Dee logos because becomes such a it
becomes it becomes a culture it becomes
a way of in culturing I almost think of
it like a little petri dish like a
bacterial culture of sorts even though
that's not a very flattering image but
but it's like it's it's a way of
culturing that very dialectical ontology
but culturing it in a way that it can be
psychologically symbolized and made
available to us imminently
mmm and I think that is it's great
function it's available as its readiness
to hand I suppose as I said high
daguerreian way is precisely what avails
its potential for us I think this
particular moment
time right since thinking about like I
wonder if this is I know what this is
it's kind of a interesting an
interesting thing to do as a practice
right because probably what it takes to
actually do it it's very much speaking
to like talking about sometimes I'll go
I'll go for a walk or I'll be around
some people or something like that and
I'll just like and if I look at somebody
and not just see if I can find the place
right where I could actually conceive of
spending the rest of eternity with it
right like nothing is a good idea not
that I would or something but like that
I can like it's like that sense of like
I could buy it and spend the rest of my
life with them like that feeling into
that place and it's interesting I most
of the time I can't and it's hard to
describe but I think that's a little bit
of what we're getting at right I think
yeah yeah I think I know what you mean
that's a I think that's a profound
analogy that's really good that's really
good
profound precisely because it's just
available enough to imagine and get
supremely difficult right right because
there's a feedback right there's a
feedback thing about like yeah it's
something about like whatever it is that
could whatever it's reaching for seems
to be something like that right the
plates where even if they say yes yes no
the jet the gesture of its meaning the
gesture of its meaning that particular
analogy is a deep gesture yeah it's a
deep gesture yeah it's just adjusters
beyond it's conceivable application it
just lives beyond it's conceivable
actuality which is precisely what makes
it time like right and if there's like
where it's there's a sense where it's
like if there's something in the eye or
in the face it's like where it's like
something about like okay right there
okay and you can feei almost building it
feels like a visceral okay I can abide
there right
there huh that's right and you usually
it takes a it takes a particular moment
of beauty to alert to invert your
attention to that particular possibility
- right you ever have that experience
you're talking to somebody and just
nothing is happening and then there's
one comment or one particularly you
suddenly the Abdi suddenly the aperture
of being opens ever so slightly as to
allow a little bit of light through and
you suddenly see possibility in relation
to a person that was not available a
moment before right that the cosmos
protrudes through them as it were right
and and and and then cultivating that
that's the that glimmer of beauty
however momentary it might be is
precisely the affordance of turning
turning on the heel of the relationship
and tipping it into something properly
dialogic right yeah he's so interesting
to the experience of not finding that
with somebody yeah like where it's like
he and that's really true it's like
sometimes they're just people that or a
relationship that it gets lost or that
where there isn't that something that
catches and it's for me anyways it's the
experience of like there's a I don't
know if it's the opposite of it but it's
the it's something else right how does
how do the proportions work out for you
because you you have made you've made a
vocation out of pronouncing this
potential in people and eliciting it and
warming it yeah and and and creating the
conditions for it right you mean you
have that cultivated as a craft I find
it very rare I find realizing that
possibility let's assume that it always
remains possible but I find to rely my
realization of that possibility quite
rare reading in relationships with
people
and to the point where I find that the
number where that possibilities realized
is as far as you were then well then the
volume of people or the volume of I
should shouldn't have put it in terms of
persons but put it in terms of relations
or in terms of the counters it seems
more that's something better but the
number of relationships that don't seem
to draw out those conditions far greater
in number volume for me than the net
than the ones that do but you I mean you
have an affinity with this as practice
how do you find that shakes out in your
experience you made the part where when
it doesn't go like that yeah I mean how
often does that happen and then what
kind of effort do you put in in any
given and Tammy not you know when you're
at the store and like buying milk or
something but anything more substantial
anything more substantial than the most
than the most you know I don't know then
the most quotidian of experience is how
much do you put hmm no that's not the
right question there's that there's a
there's a right does the locus of the
right question and I haven't gotten
there yet
what's the right question the right
question is how what is the value for
you in finding that reliably in any
given encounter beyond the most
superficial it encounters right well
like we talked
about before there's been it's been
something to kind of like you know when
you have a vocation like this right and
you show up for a course and you start
relating to people and you don't feel
like it you're not the mood or something
like that yeah we were talking about
this distance to doing it right until
I've I've been in situations work but
you just don't really have it eat my the
conditions of my life that I have
committed to don't justify me going with
that feeling there's another there's
another thing that that is calling for
me which is really great I mean that's
why we have commitments right like like
this precisely we were committed
precisely because those times that we
don't feel like doing it right we differ
we differ agency to the commitment
itself right well there's a greater
sense of yes it's simply better right if
that happens now I don't always feel
like if I'm not in a course or something
like that and I'm a bad mood or
something like it I'm not necessarily
predisposed and looking for that right
but I should say that like if if I have
a choice between being that way not
being that way being that way is just
better right it's always enriched um
it's always more enriched key and I
think there are like there aren't people
that there are people that call it out
naturally for me right but you're right
to think the thing about the yeah there
is something about the ritual of doing
it over and over and over and over and
over again right like opening that way
with somebody inviting them to open that
way to um and it's also kind of like you
know it's it's gotta be net and he's
funny it's God there is a naturalist
miss for it you're free to like it's
it's um it's strange for me to say this
because I'm like I set conditions up for
Pete for this to happen but like at
least for me in my own life there is a
quality of like
uh I really wanted to be a natural
inclination right that is like I don't
it's almost the opposite of like when I
take them if I take a position like I'm
gonna do something for to somebody or
I'm gonna make something happen or
something like that
it's contextually I think with
manipulation like you can't manipulate
it right or if you come from
manipulating it's you're sitting in the
wrong place for it to happen
right so but like if I'm for example I
mean I was doing this I was doing this
like I was having a couple like hard
days earlier this week and I noticed I
was just there's that self thing closure
that kind of starts to happen and I and
I went outside and I walked around and I
just was like 116 if I could find that
place in people right and I could and if
there was something about like I didn't
talk to anybody but I was just you know
because we don't talk to anybody anymore
now anyways it's illegal you know um but
like having that place and finding that
spot is there's an openness to that
right yeah but I'm definitely not
enlightened well that's that's a tall
order against which to measure yourself
but I mean you you mean you have that
much is obvious you have you have a
particular predisposition for it you
have a knack for it a cultivated knack
but let a knack a knack nevertheless but
that to me that the thing that always
the thing I saw I find discourages me
from it as a matter of course sometimes
we were talking also about this a little
bit before about how solitude beget
solitude and how sometimes your your
need for Alumnus becomes well it can
become addictive although I actually
don't mean it as an addiction
it has well a particular motive appetite
maybe that is an addiction maybe it is
but but the thing that I find difficult
is that the energy required to fall into
that well no that's not quite right
falling into it is precisely what
doesn't require the energy or what what
scenes the energy as opposed to depletes
it but it's not
until the moment I can maybe put this
with a Haida garyun spin until the
moment when it becomes the always
already condition of your being until
the moment that you wake within it and
find it acting and find it acting
through you as a property of your your
your sudden world right until the moment
that happens yeah it is unavailable
right I find right until the moment that
happens it is unavailable yeah and the
prospect of mustering the resources to
conjure it or to somehow induce it
willfully I find to be a prospect that
is so distant as to be almost hopeless
right the idea that I can muster the
wherewithal necessary to engage people
in rapt conversation or in deal allows
for God you know god forbid and yet when
when suddenly you're in the I'm in the
throes of the process when suddenly the
world consists of the process as one of
its properties
suddenly the energy required is implicit
to the being of that world yeah and is
no longer unavailable it is an extent at
that point yeah but there's this there's
this gap there's this gap it's a kind of
it's a gap of ontology maybe it's also a
bit of an epistemic gap I'm not exactly
sure how best to philosophically
characterize that gap but there is a gap
between the world in which that is
unavailable and and seems fruitless you
know yeah and the world in which it's so
abundant has to be inexhaustible yeah
yeah and and
bridging from one to the other is
precisely I think what requires the
symbol on right it requires a symbolic
ray that's that's precisely what the
dialogic praxis is a symbol does is it
bridges from one world into the other
but without that without that symbol
available there that's symbolizing
vessel I find it remarkably remarkably
difficult it's that chasm can seem
pretty insuperable or that's I guess
that's wrong metaphor but it can seem
impossible to cross yeah it's like well
it's like that's I think anchor right
though here's the thing is it's from if
I do if I look at it like well I think I
just was kind of looking or trying to
work it out like in terms of like my own
subjectivity write my own subjectivity
within my own the walls of my own skin I
 like you know like it doesn't
take much for me not to feel like doing
some good right like yeah but I think if
I look at myself is distributed into the
world right this is where I it's really
important to like to really be committed
make commitments binding commitments
that call forth from you somebody who's
beyond your preferences you're dating
because I think that's how I need to
take almost any human being right they
need just have them good go with their
preferences I think our preferences is
just to be comfortable and to be
slovenly just let go do what you feel
like and you'll you know you'll end up
you know high demanding right and just
that but is but they think that there's
a sense in which guy is yeah he's
distributed in his life right so you
know on one level it's like sometimes
the feeling state gray is inspired right
I would just move towards that if I
wasn't committed to
and in other times the the the feeling
state is in the symbol of the activity
or the commitment it's holding that's
right and I think that's the way it's
supposed to be right because our pen
sense marriage and our discussions about
marriage your take on marriage was if I
recall precisely that that comes that
coven ental that coven ental consignment
of yourself to the very thing that is
going to call forth what is most real
and meaningful from you even if it
doesn't feel available in the moment yep
yep and this is why I like you know what
six years like I'm hearing a lot of
people talk about like this is gonna you
know the crisis with everybody working
at home companies are finding out that
you can operate without having to meet
in an office I think it's a little bit
of an early call oh yeah he really calls
why my experience is that if it's
precisely going into the offices is what
allows people to be as productive as
they are it's because of the of the
institution and the structure yes you
know what
you know brianne's home and she's not
like it just she notices it's like it's
so easy for her to like the cut the
house calls her attention to all these
different things in it isn't work it's
really taking a new muscle for her to to
stay working right yeah yeah II know and
you know it's I'm glad you said that
because this has kind of been on my mind
for the last couple of days and it has
to do with this virtual environment that
is multiplying around us and I mean the
end I don't mean like I I don't mean the
the global phenomenon of everyone using
virtual tools but I mean the particular
dialogic or arena that we're seeing
around us all of these other diello
going right and all of the people that
we were now that are increasingly
becoming this community but you know
there are so many names for it now I
can't keep track of them and a lot of
the folks that you're talking with and
that John's talking with
and there's something genuinely exciting
about it for all of the reasons that
we've enumerated but I have a concern
about it too and and John and I have
talked a little bit about this
I think I'm think I'm more concerned
about it perhaps that then then he is
although I don't want to speak for him
they're not I the this that could this
capacity that we are reducing right now
by talking I don't like I I want to
underwrite it with as much enthusiasm as
possible because I have been so
surprised by how how authentic it has
felt and how affect how and how
authentic it's it's moding has been to
me and I mean right I mean I wouldn't
know you or be talking to you if this
weren't the case I'm incredibly I'm
incredibly humbled and grateful for
great so now all of that said I am
worried about the possibility that the
virtuality starts that the virtual
medium becomes confused as a necessary
design feature of deal Lagos itself
because I don't subscribe to that in a
million years not in my life I will
always prefer the embodied physical
presence of the POW with whom I am
ritualizing without a doubt without a
doubt for me the preference is still
clear and completely unambiguous and I
know that there are features of virtual
dislike genome I think John even in our
last conversation with John in Jordan
John was talking about the fact that you
know your face appears bigger on a
screen and and that would have
implications for personal space we're
two people to be in the same room
together and I think that's a good
observation and I think that there is
something to that there is something to
that there is something to the format
that grants a certain shared spatial
presence that perhaps is hard to come by
at least until you get to know somebody
very well but for me there is no
substitution here and and I I have I it
would take I don't know I don't know
what kind of persuasive argument it
would take to convince me that the
virtuality of this medium is somehow
more conducive to dialo goes and the
physical presence of people in the same
room because I will always prefer that
and I don't think we're even close to
being able to make the claim that the
virtuality is a worthy substitute or a
worthy successor yes to the physical
embodied presence of persons sharing
space and dialogue and I'm a little
concerned that all of the extolling of
the virtual medium that's happening and
it's very well deserved but I'm worried
that that that extolling of the virtual
medium will start to enculturate the
idea that somehow this virtuality is
necessary for dear logos to flourish Oh
No and I really and maybe it maybe it's
so obvious that it doesn't even need to
be said but somehow yeah somehow I have
this I have this I have this concern
that it's a shiny new toy and we're all
in love with it right now and I know why
and fair enough but it's not a shiny new
toy that should be that should be
confused with some kind of necessary
condition for a practice that's been
that's been you know totally long lived
without it that was a bit of a spiel but
I just I'm something about what you said
really touch that that apprehension of
mine and I'm wondering what you think of
it well well one thing I just what I had
this thought is you're talking about
it's like yeah I don't I know know if
it's obvious or not but I don't think
it's the substitute I was like yeah but
there's a it
danger isn't that we would think that it
is the dangerous is that the drift right
there's a drift right where we could
just find ourselves at some point within
these constraints and thinking inside of
them yes and being that's the thing I
think you probably have your eye on
that's a very high degree and critique
which is good yes totally yeah yeah yeah
you're you're exactly right exactly
propositional II I think most people
would agree it's not a substitution but
I'm worried about the I'm worried about
it tacitly becoming so right now if we
look at it like what is it about us
explore this kind of sense the
sensibility that you find yourself
having right about this isn't like the
virtual thing
without sharing space that's it's just a
it's not the same thing right
and you can't equate it is the same
thing it's not gonna be a substitute
right what is it that you understand
about that that like what is it about
sharing space versus just seeing each
other's space yet only sharing time hmm
what is it about like about like if we
say it's not just there is a kind of gut
obvious 'no stew it but that's what it
actually has me started to think about
it like what is it that's obvious about
that that's a good question what happens
when we share space together or in a
space together versus not versus
for me what comes to mind is the ritual
of it but there is a certain there is us
there as a necessity of embodiment when
it comes to to to imagining and also
executing ritual that the physicality
right of the flesh of it and you know
this is the ice maybe this is the
Catholic in me it could very well be I
guess but it just wouldn't make it
unimportant there is something to me at
least there's something very necessary
about the flesh of the process
it must be fleshed yeah it must be
fleshed and you know I think it must be
it must be consummated in the flesh and
and yeah if this is definitely the
Catholic in me there's no doubt about
that but yeah I think that's it is that
the tent the word must be made flesh in
the dia logos okay you know I can't
believe I just said that but but and and
I cannot I don't sight I don't see Lee
around that I don't and that's not that
there may again that doesn't
devalue this but but this to me this to
me part of the value of the virtuality
is its value it's part of its value is
its referring right to me the value
that's realized in the virtual deilogos
refers us to the value of the ritual
embodied dia logos right there is
continuity between the phenomena between
the practices there's no doubt about it
if anything I think that there
virtuality of this process valorizes its
embodiment and further encourages it
right right
so there's
there's yes the capacity the symbolic
capacity for ritualization I think
predicates and in embodiment yeah and
and I don't see that I just I can't seem
I can't see myself outside of that maybe
some people can but I can't so there's
there's that and then with that comes
all of the Amenas we all well know
there's a there's a wealth of intimation
that happens in the margins of the
propositional and semantic content that
is precisely yeah a product of gesture
and and we can convey a certain amount
of that in video conferencing video you
know dialogue we can a little bit and
and that's not insignificant but it's
not I don't think I also don't think
it's sufficient certainly nowhere near
comprehensive it's so if if deal Doggett
let's put it this way if the dialogue
assist if the logos is if the logos is
the ritualized meaning towards and
therein aspires to be an agog ik then we
want to mark it with the deepest most
complex gestures that it is capable of
intimating yeah yeah and I think in
order to do that sufficiently we also
have to embody it as comprehensively we
have to embody the process of
contemplation as comprehensively as
comprehensively and comprehensively as
we can possibly afford ourselves yeah
yeah yeah totally because there's
thought yeah so something about like so
for the work to become flesh right yeah
and when I said when I said when I said
I can't believe I just said that I I
didn't I didn't mean that in a kind of I
didn't evident in a sec where they just
say I said I I can't believe I said that
because I can't believe I'm I'm using it
so I don't mean to use something like
that so
casually because I know what that
invokes it invokes a notion that I can't
hope to swallow but but so it's it's I
said I can't believe I said that not not
not because anyway I'm advocating anyway
it doesn't matter I'm aware of all that
I'm invoking by saying that and I and I
know that I'm being crushed by the very
invocation even as I invoke it but I
still invoke it purposefully yes yes is
something about like I'm thinking about
just this sense of what it is to be in a
space with another person right like
because there's you know the difference
between Brienne being home and not being
home though right now from what you can
see like nothing right it looks like if
there's it doesn't none of that
shows but her tongue I did see her walk
by so it shows nothing I know what you
mean
all right like on some level her
presence right is is is enacted through
me and in ways that I am my nervous
system is oriented around right so so if
we think about that like because so much
of so much of the dialogue owes right
its impact is has this quality of being
with people that that is at the level of
how like a child knows how to speak
there's a mimicry right of like when
somebody's being really really present
or is moved by something and they're
embodying something right there there
there's silence gathers so many
different dimensions right there's a
tuning up of that that you can't put it
into words right and you can't explain
and I think that that is a you know we
all inhabit that in in a conversation
right like so there
that inhabitation right that that I just
think that there's an orientating thing
that when your body likes feels into the
space and it's oriented around right
there's so many things that I'm like
abiding by that I that I could do that
I'm not doing right now well how do I
know not to do that it's because there's
a there's a way that my I'm in social
space my
body is is nose to gesture in certain
ways right like I I don't I don't go and
like shoot I don't take the hot dog
although it would be nice to stick it in
my ear because it feels good I just
don't do it it's it in that not doesn't
isn't because it's not possible it's
very possible but like that not these
ranges that I'm inside of are so
embodied social organizations that
aren't thought about right but like I
think with when you're in a conversation
that's what's great about like convert
conversing is that because there is a
little place where you're kind of
creating a universe right in which you
know you still you get haunted with new
knots right orientations new knots that
you don't go into right and on a very
visceral level and it does seem like
it's that's a 3d experience right it's a
3d experience whereas with but they also
think it but it's also I think your
protests around this right or your
warning I should say around it also is
beginning of something even more than
that right that it's possible to have to
drift that way right that it's possible
that it could just go that way in fact
it's more likely actually if you just
look at the movement of things it's more
likely that it will right yeah and I I
think that there's another part of
embodied experience is that it's
precisely what technology gets rid of
right in fact the more it collapses
distance right the more concealed being
of something is right like like it's
like it's weird it's like the further
the cloaks
something is the more the more it
doesn't exist right so it's like so so
you know that it's the difference
between you know sending a text and then
a letter reading a letter like there's
there's a completely different thing
going on there because you have to
actually endure the character of my of
the paper of my handwriting you gotta go
through the struggle right in some ways
on some level the letter is isn't
instant right you have to go through
more of a process and endure something
which you could tell if you got a letter
versus just like a text that thing would
stand out and be present to you you like
you'd remember it it would sit someplace
in you write verses if you just read
that so there's a quality of like I
think everywhere in our world in ways
that are so there's it's so I
think it's it's so hard to fathom to
what degree because we think within it
right we don't think about it much right
it's hard to get outside of it but the
amount of distance in just a short
period of time that's been collapsed
right that we don't we don't no longer
notice that we're we don't experience
anymore right is precisely the stuff
right it's through struggle which is
where character arises from mm-hmm
that's right that's right the removal of
resistance is a serious philosophical
problem yeah yeah so like that kind of
thing about like gone you know gone
through something having somebody
challenge you the feeling like not being
able to escape it and like having to
confront it and then you know like yes
ray yes yes you know that's interesting
that's interesting yeah indeed that
immediacy of everything and even in
these particular even like even in these
forums and even in in the virtual
discourses that we're talking about some
of that immediacy daunts me a little bit
because be
because and I think it's part of why I
I'm leery of becoming over committed to
a sphere of discourse that demands
immediate attention ceaseless immediate
attention to me I see that as I see that
as a very very risky thing of which to
partake and there's a joy in the
partaking of it but there's also to me a
real danger because you know there is a
there's an edifying and upbuilding
dimension of the being whisked away by
it of the being whisked away by
something of such complexity but there's
also a danger in the being whisked away
by it because it becomes very difficult
to them we collect and retrieve and
regather yeah the dispersions of
yourself that can then be cast across
the space because it is now so it is
because it is now so you sort of
ubiquitous and instantaneous both to me
the possibility of being lost within it
is also commensurately greater yeah yeah
so so that you know that and it seems to
be a just a property at the environment
now that every as everything becomes
more and more entangled as everything
you know the encounters and meetings of
the discourses and the conversations is
everything now starts weaving together
and it's complexify apid lee there's
great central potential in that
complexification but there's also there
is also a certain breathlessness to it
there's a certain almost a certain
anaerobic sprint mmm-hmm that it that it
encourages and I'm very I find myself
very leery of that
yeah if there's a sprint without having
to endure the exhaustion afterwards like
in any like direct way like that if you
it like a sprint it's interesting when
you sprint when you're done you know you
just went through something
there's something about sprinting in
this way it disappears right away at
most you get a sense of like yeah I've
been sitting too long or like I haven't
noticed my body which is apparently
that's one of the dangers I've noticed
about being friendly just clean so is
that there's so much of this feedback
loop that like you don't you lose touch
with your body so you don't feel how
uncomfortable you actually are yeah
there is a quality of like the amount of
things that were covering with without
having yeah it's interesting it's really
true because there's something about
there's something about what I mean this
I guess there's almost kind of an
Augustinian thought something like that
but that when something is when when the
ontology of something is distributed
temporarily there is something about
there's something about being that is
revealed when distributed across time
right that anything that I think in some
sense anything that that that
appreciates across time that is
reflective of its particular ontology as
opposed to something that depreciates
across time if the distance of time has
an impact on the normativity of
something that that's telling that's
telling and so there's something about I
mean there's something there's something
about me a bit and I guess that's just
gets into Hans arguments about time a
little bit too but there's something
yeah what am I trying to say that that
that time is a
is a a way of it is a when I guess when
we get into a certain relationship with
it it can be a way of measuring out the
particular normativity of certain acts
certain speeches certain exercises it is
revealing of normativity if not
constituting of it but at least
revealing of it right and that's why
somehow being that's why I think all
there's all this discourse about being
in the right relationship to time or
wrong relationship to time because time
becomes a kind of a way of distributing
out the being of a particular entity
such that it's being becomes becomes
perceptually measurable or appreciable
move and end and and so it becomes a way
of knowing
it becomes a way of knowing the nature
of the activities that we're undertaking
right at a time it takes to do them and
embodies the particular nature of the
thing that is taking the time yeah and
and absent that I think it's very hard
to be properly appreciative in those
senses of the term of what is happening
when it takes a little time
yeah yes sorry that was a gargle mess
but there's something I don't quite have
that clear yet but like that there's
it's not immediately right there it
tells us like we're I think that we're
on to something you know like moving
into here because there's that there is
that but there's also that there's this
you know it is part of the whole thing I
think that bleeds through that like when
we end we press a button it's gone you
can't do that
like in physical proximity right like in
fact that not it's not just that it's
not just the isolated thing about like
instant on-off right it's the it's the
possibility that's being that the of
that being the case it actually is
present through the whole thing that's
right so when I think about this sense
with with like basically in physical
space right there's there's a sense of
coming off the horizon and coming close
right and then meeting and there's that
whole thing that like orientation like
sizing things up and you know the merit
the narrativity of it the proper
narrativity of it before the during the
after yeah right and enduring that and
feeling a body orienting around that the
different customs and like I'm different
outside than I am inside there's a
transition moments and that somehow in
some way that's gotta be present
like if you and I were sat together like
we went through that we had this exact
conversation except for on the couch
right that beginning walking in it being
a process that we mutually disclose is
disclosed with us that is that yeah with
the with this it's very easy for it to
be that's contained we gone yeah yeah
gone
that's right that's right that's right
we can we can contain it and and and and
we can multiply it much more easily
whereas it yeah if I come to your house
and I sit on your couch the the time
taken and the space taken as the
conversation unfolds there is an
assonance between the journey taken in
the conversation and the spatial and
temporal journey undertaken and the
series of movements required to get us
into the situation of the conversation
so the in whirling the convergence as
you say right the converse is the curd
the co-creation of the particular cosmos
of the conversation is something that
when spanning distance and spanning
space and time it symbolizes I think
more it symbolizes it's it's a more
enacted experience precisely because the
process is is concurrent at those
different levels of intelligibility it's
great as the different scales of the the
different scales of logos in the dia
logos are are synchronizing right
they're synchronizing right it's alright
the same reason why people go for a walk
with somebody to to to do a while
they're having a discussion right let's
take a walk and discuss it's because the
actual journey of the walk is
analogically hacen a ting with the
contents of the conversation as they're
unfolding you're trying to symbolically
pair you're trying to live out the
metaphor acity yeah so as to conduce the
very process that that that will that
will realize it's no that's not quite
right you're you're like you're trying
to well you're trying to to realize your
conversation not a very at a somatic
level at a level of physicality that
matches to the intelligibility of the
speech itself right you're trying to get
those things to connect and that's what
has what's happening part of what's
happening in ritual right is that you're
trying to conform your gesture to the
logos of your speech as to as to possess
it with as much in as much intelligible
attitude as possible as to accommodate
as much mystery as it you can as it can
possibly fathom yeah and there's and
there's a way in which these contain
spurts of conversation though they're so
deeply meaningful in the course of their
occurrence they can be so they can be so
easily extracted from that soma ties
analogic process that usually contains
them and and and you and that means you
can also do many of them right and and
so that's one of the reasons why I don't
actually like to I mean this is very
meaning
I find this very meaningful but I don't
like to do it yeah I don't want to do
this every day right
I don't want I'd be right I don't even
want to do this every week necessarily
yeah because for me which is why which
is why sometimes which is part of the
leerin ascribing the lire anticipation
even in an arena as fruitful and as as
as well well meaning I mean that I write
I mean that very pregnant Lee given our
discussions about meaning even of even a
a an arena of conversation as well
meaning as the one that's happening
right now I'm leery of over
participation because for me the before
the during and the after is a necessary
and indispensable part of those
conversations and if I do one of these
every day there's no way there's no way
that I can spatialize it adequately as
to appreciate its meaning and and and I
don't want to hyperventilate my way
through these I want to breathe them
with deep lungfuls before during and
after
I want to make proper narratives out of
them and live them in such a way that
the living of them becomes partakes of
the same intelligible pattern as the
logos that has spoken within them and I
find that personally impossible to do if
you know and then for maybe for some
people it is possible I don't preclude
that possibility but I find myself very
limited in my capacity to appreciate
them if they become so if babies I'm so
regularized you know if they become
these daily you know anyway anyway I've
gone on but yeah that's what what would
you say actually no if we just if you
just take this out like let's just say
that you did do it every day except for
you did it at a place
right in a room or a temple right and
you engaged in dialogue OHS everyday or
like on a walk right or something like
everyday versus doing it like this is
this interesting
not that you would I doubt that you
would still prefer to do it every day if
it was maybe you would but like but if
we chain that out what would be the
difference mmm is it like what would be
the difference right it's a good
question that's a good question
well what I haven't feel my first thing
that comes to mind is I have a feeling
that like if we were meeting if we were
meeting every day and we say we were
walking around the lake right that that
there's there's something about a walk
or being together every day wear that
thing about yet it's funny the it's the
it's the allowance of silence would make
space for like you being in a mood or
something or not or being withdrawn
right like where it's like you you could
be withdrawn or in a mood or not really
kind of there but yet that where is
online it just wouldn't make any sense
to not talk great that's right face like
is unless you like that the
thing right but we're shared by the word
we're sharing something together that
even your silence is a disclosure right
to us that we may or may not pay
attention to we make poke you and tease
you about it we may but we like or we
may just let you be right but it would
be a communique it would be a it was
part of the conversation in some way
right right and you would still partake
of it and you could partake of it right
because there's it would fill out in
that space what
so just that alone it's like if you
could do that and have that right like
first of all it'd be it'd be a real
different thing right mm-hmm I yes yes I
I hadn't put my finger on that but now
that you've said it that way
I think you've I think you've I think
you've pinned something really important
which is that when the when this
practice is distributed over space and
perhaps also over time it allows for it
allows it's much more accommodative for
nonverbal intimations for non for the
non verbal meaning for the silence to
inter fuse sound for the non verbal
meaning to punctuate between the
syllables of the verbal meanings and so
it so that it allowed beat by by
allowing conversation to breathe so much
more you'll allow it to accommodate I
think more intelligibility and that
you're right that's something that you
can that's something that's much much
more available yeah when it takes place
in a place yeah and it's also more
disruptive it's more disruptive there's
really not much that's destructive I
mean there's time allotment but other
than that there's nothing disruptive
about sitting down at the table opening
the computer putting on a set of
headphones and and talking to you and
you know when I close my laptop I'm
going to be back in my apartment right
now alone suddenly now no longer with
guy here right in a manner of speaking
of course guys still here but but right
I'm no longer talking to guy then back
here alone in my apartment suddenly and
this something about the suddenness of
that yeah is I find especially if the
DLO goes
self as it and variably is is meaningful
and joyful in its way there's something
about the abruptness of its end that is
jarring to me every single time every
single time right so let every single
time I find it like huh
it's over and what would what wait what
do I do with myself now I feel like I
need a I need a you know it's like it's
like going and exercising and not doing
a cool-down
or something suddenly so so that it's
not yeah it's not the somehow the the
borders of the experience are not
ceremony alized yeah yeah right the
experience is meaningful yeah but its
borders are not ceremonial eyes and
therefore and therefore integrating it
back into the rhythms of the everyday is
correspondingly more difficult it's like
what John talks about with meditation
right that the key is to actually as you
resurface from your meditation to try
and carry forth and then confer into the
waking life all that you have
contemplated the very practice the very
the very dynamic of the practice that
you've cultivated to confer it into your
waking life but there's a way in which
you can do that by spatial izing the
transition from one state into another
and there's something about just closing
the computer wait for me that does not
do that it has not do that it's much
more abrupt wait okay and and and that's
not to say that there is no way to do
that for truly maybe there is maybe but
but it's not obvious to me and I think
that's the point is that it's not it's
not obvious that you can simply
substitute for once what what does what
the spatial distribution does to the
ritual
of your dialogue yeah yeah oh god this
is this is really like it so many
faithful wait because I'm wondering
about you know um I don't know if you've
seen a few conversations I've had with
Cory Anton he wrote a book he said no
not yet
Cory Anton well he wrote a book called
sovereign authenticity um where he he
basically takes baby well that was his
first book he wrote a second book on the
sent something significance and Neos
stoicism but it's he's got a continental
philosophy base he's a professor
great writer and the last one he's doing
is called beat I think it's called the
the nothingness that haunts everything
he's a great guy anyways in that book he
talks about the other he talks about the
other as a condition of my own existence
and I'm in other words like there's not
me in a world that is before I was born
or after the world laughter I was born
and you're not one of those things that
I just encounter in space know that
you're like already the in you walking
towards me I am in some way haunted
right with you as an eventing that I'm
orienting to and being shaped by and so
many things are possible in that
interaction that are so constituting
that that you weren't they eat that you
weren't just a piece of stuff that I
turn and look away like an object you
are a condition of my own existence I am
I am on some level called to
justification in our enactment right and
I'm wondering like as we're talking
about this I'm wondering if that
actually happens online like if that's
really the case in some way like
because what is it what is it - just
consist so there's also this other thing
about like when you eliminate but it you
know I want to put another another
marker or point to something here that's
just interesting - I think and we all
should we ought to do one of these
things without the visual and just do it
with sound and just auditory auditory I
have a feeling that there's something
about the visual right that is so
binding right right sound right because
there is a sense in which like yeah
there's something about that that it
just be interesting to experiment with
right like what is it what is it to be
in the same room and like know that like
if I got out of line
you could kill me right like what is
it's not my god what it's not like I'm
considering that but the truth of it is
if I give it a certain amount of
behavior right like I would elicit a
response that would I'd have to contend
with right yes and in that it's because
I haven't thought about it that much
means it just it means how much of the
normativity is granted by that a
possibility right well yeah that's such
a good point yeah yeah that's right
there are no you're exactly right there
are there are there are very primordial
stakes involved when suddenly we are
right in presenta with one another
there are mortal stakes involved this
absolute we're primates still right
there are suddenly all of all that is
implicit in our social behavior that
exists I think I was having a chat with
Andrew Sweeney about this very thing
that this
distinction a while back that suddenly
when you're present together in the same
space
the confrontation is suffused with a
certain modesty and I mean modesty and
more right in its whole or meaning
precisely because suddenly there is
danger yeah suddenly there's danger and
the danger is important and I think the
danger in ritual is very important right
that's why that's why that's why
traditionally rituals involved right
from whatever degree they involve a
degree of danger however pronounce that
happens to be but but I think that yes
now I guess one could say that there is
a certain danger in the exposure of a
virtual dialogue and that's not nothing
and I think that does that does serve an
important function right the presence of
the onlookers does confer a certain
amount of implicit danger even to the
virtual conversation but there is an
added dimension of the physical the
danger of the physical confrontation
that always always presents an implicit
threat of injury uh-huh right that I
think has something to do with me with
with the realness of the practice well
its capacity to access realness well
seems to me to have something to do with
the imminent presence of danger yeah or
that presence of danger and in some ways
maybe this is simply enumerated the
conditions for flow maybe this shouldn't
be surprising at all right because
because because challenge right
challenge that whether that zone of
proximal development the challenge that
elicits a response that forces you to
graduate your capacity and any given
moment is precisely one of the
conditions for flow right but when that
is presented as as
as a very yeah when that's when that's
when that's presented as a as a as a
very immediate threat of danger I think
that has something to do with all of
this right great totally in that sense
of that sense of it's really kind of and
also in in social out there it's a
certain amount of that in this but it's
the quality of like image I think it
really does matter if you know if this
was distributed in between moments in
which we were but we shared space
embodied right like and not that's a
real I think that's a real big thing if
there's a future of that's in the in
fact that's kind of what you're talking
about like or like what I at least what
I heard what you're talking about when
you brought yourself that that we could
actually just have it be a tolerable
thing that some of the deepest
conversations I have with people are
online and I don't even have an
expectation of ever actually meeting
them in person right like that's it's
that it's losing that horizon right that
that just becomes part of the world
which it I think it will be I think it
is right because I think it is yeah yeah
yeah that's that but also that just that
sense of the edges I've never really
kind of thought about that I'm like yeah
it's the edges but it's not just the
stark beginning and end but it's it's in
what way are those are those edges
substantiating through the very the very
what I say what I don't say all those
kinds of things right like I think on
one some level if reputation is on the
line right which as long as you're
speaking pretty much it is right
oh yeah it's like pretty much it is I
mean that I think granted enough reality
yes yes I think you're right it can
catch and it can fake it out of a very
real thing right yes but yeah you right
like somebody smell the that all the
different mannerisms and like the
adjusting and and that the coming into
it and being a process and the ritual of
that in like really contending with
somebody in a very physical way right
yes yes and also yeah in the possibility
of physical contact raised right that's
right so substantiated that's right and
the by been in a bivalent way right
because the possibility of physical
contact can can mean threat of injury it
can mean dominance it can be it can mean
death but it can also mean it can also
mean again I'm thinking of this in terms
of the arrows right that when arrows
becomes couched in that filee of
practice you know it can veer in it
suddenly when you're when you're in
proximity to somebody it's its potential
is unbounded yeah right
so yes you mean the on one on the one
hand you could end up you could end up
fought and and dead yeah right and on
the other hand you can end up you that
the capacity for closeness obviously
between people in physical proximity is
also amplified yeah right so that so the
the the boundaries that are input around
the capacity for the relationship and
it's evolution at any given time are
instantly appreciated by your mutual
physicality right whether whether that
but whether the whether it be the danger
of the possibility or the or the or the
promise of deepening the relationship
itself yeah yeah totally yeah
so anyway there's a lot of strands here
and maybe we'll want to pick this this
thread up again because I know that for
me I'm just trying to I'm not even sure
what a lot of this means it's just sort
of coming out in spirits but there's
something there's something to all of
this I think that's worth thinking more
about and and trying to tighten up as
certainly I feel I feel I feel compelled
now that this is all that this is all
coming up to try and give it a little
bit more geometry yeah totally and it's
uh it's also be interesting to think
about like what happens when we get when
we do virtual right and we can get into
that you know what does that what does
it mean I heard somebody talk about like
them being in a virtual meeting me and
and he apparently there's places that
you go and then you meet up and they're
their avatars right yeah and he was
talking about where he was talking to
people and then somebody came up to his
says hey have you seen this other thing
like no one knows about it right and it
goes into some room and he takes him to
this and there's all these people in
this other room there was a sense of
just where like I'm imagining it right
now how easily it could translate but
then again there's that quality of you
take those things off right it's
probably gonna be even more intense yeah
so there is a there is a sense of like
especially if you think is to me this is
just place so much about what I've been
fascinated with and into that were one
of the things the Heidegger just really
speaks to me is like he's like look like
Castel right das bon right the Castel
the the standing reserve right isn't
isn't antic it's ontological and so this
is I think what I'm heat like this is
where it goes like well when we say ah
but it is going to go that way it is
going to drift that way there's that's
where you really get it like even if you
line up the thing
he show how awful it is and he'd get
well informed that like there's a
movement of of an understanding that's
going on right and and seeing it's
uncanny 'no sand its weirdness is part
of the thing about confronting it right
absolutely in other words it's beyond an
action and a moral stance right that's
the thing that's the thing about it but
it has me think about like well on some
level like if we look at if like we're
the standing reserve as well and that's
one of the things that my understanding
of when Heidegger was talking about like
kind of what makes this tech not the age
of technology and not kind of subject
object being as subjects and objects
right um but instead being as that which
is waiting like that which is available
to be to be excavated extracted and
ordered right for its own sake great
that that the deck was all the way down
to even the way that we conceive
ourselves the way that we conceived
relationships the way we contextualize
things and fashioned things that that's
the the basis upon which it makes sense
to even consider giving that up right
it's just there'd be an of coarseness so
there's a quality of life on if I look
at it that way there's a way in which
were you're basically saying like no
this is sacred great there's a sacred
literally great yeah yeah exactly and
that it can't be extracted right
it can't be optimized right and like
sucked out right like it's it can be
utilized but like but more like the
windmill it has to grow it has to still
grow in the wild it has to still grow in
the wild kind of how I think about it
right it has to and I think about it in
terms of the dialogue dialogue us to
right it has to
roll for it to grow truly it has to grow
in the wild and that doesn't mean that
it has to sit that that doesn't mean
that there's no agency involved and that
doesn't mean that we can't gather to
cultivate it but somehow it must remain
untamed and I think that's the great
predicament it's the great it's it's an
irony of the problem in that you know
we're trying and I'm certainly a full
unwilling participate in the project of
trying to understand the conditions that
conduce the process such that they might
be replicated and reproducible and reck
electable I think that's important
because it's such a meaningful and say
good practice but somehow that also
needs to be harmonized with the
necessity of the of the untamed
wilderness that contains within it those
inexhaustible features that remain and
dwell in the margins of what we can
organize and cohere at any given moment
in time the danger the unspeakable
dangers that lurk in the mysteries of
physical proximity and the
confrontations there and cannot be
dispensed from the process because they
are they are implicit to its sacredness
right right totally so there's the edge
there's the edge of the fire of law yeah
that's right the darkness is part of
what makes the fire sacred the fate of
darkness must be present darkness must
be present and these campfires are
wonderfully warming but but the virtual
campfire it might be said contains too
little of the darkness great great
right right totally totally because
there is there is danger there is risk
but but the risk
caps is not a sufficiently embodied as
it is when do logos is physically
manifest and symbolized in space you
know yeah yeah interesting really
interesting yeah I imagine I mean
imagine like you know the the alkyl
bodies and Socrates LED meeting unzoom
he would have asked else bodies would
have just hit end and that would have
been in that's the thing - my god it's
so obvious right but that's the thing
it's it's so it you can allude you can
allude confrontation so easily this way
right like if you like you know when you
and we're talking about this like as an
appointment that you surrender
yourselves that traps you like the
Covenant that characterizes you and
unfolds you into its narrativity like
when you pass somebody on the street
somebody you know I mean then they stop
you and they say hi I mean none but the
most antisocial person would just keep
walking heedless of the gesture right
someone stops you could hey guy I
haven't seen you I mean you're not just
gonna keep walking and ignore the person
I mean maybe some people would but
that's like a fraction of a fraction of
the population but but you can't you
can't quite do that right because
suddenly you're as you said so
eloquently or you are now conversed
you're in folded into a shared universe
immediately and now that you're always
already there you have to you have to
cope with the reality of being there in
conversation with that person you cannot
simply opt out in the way that you can
opt out like this and so again that
again the untamed nature again the
danger again the risk is so much more
imminent it's so much more felt and
lived through because you cannot simply
opt out of it so that the consignment of
oneself to thee to thee
to the to the to the rhythms of whatever
is happening is much more unavoidable
right when it's simply foist on you in
physical proximity it right kisaku T's
when he hails right like Socrates just
ensnares his interlocutors because they
can't bring themselves to walk I mean
some of them do right but not most of
them can't bring themselves to just walk
away from him
because his presence um his his presence
is so seductive that it's dangerous and
again it's that my that's that's his
beauty it's like that the local quote
that John talks about a lot about how
beauty is an angel and terrifying angel
that will that will damn near kill you
that that the that both the terror and
the rapture are made manifest when the D
logos is present and and it's precisely
V
it's precisely that the loss of agency
under the gaze of its seduction that
truly inaugurates you into the practice
and and that's it right that's part of
it is that it's one thing for us to come
volitionally to this and engage with one
another but it's another thing to have
it erupt suddenly and disruptively
into your world and transfigure your
world around you unwittingly because
suddenly you came across the presence of
beauty that you know could not help but
to change you great and that that that
happens when we encounter people in the
world yeah that kind that does not come
with the set of objects it does not and
it can't arguably right it can't that's
the whole point is that it can't yeah
yeah so there's yeah there's a lot
that's there's so much that's here with
us there's so much that we can exemplify
here but there's also so much that we
can exemplify precisely because of its
absence yeah much of that is absent from
this conversation that you and I are
having all of those things that were
describing right we can we can this this
this arena between you and I right now
is has sufficient breath that it can
accommodate an imagination of all that
it lacks which is precisely the
continuity I think between the virtual
dialogue and that dialogue in presenta
because the virtual dialogue is the
virtual dialogue has a capacious imagine
nation and I think by its imagination
itta finds itself to its its physical
correspondent but I think that it should
be in reference to its embodied nature
and not as a way of substituting it's
embodied nature yeah totally totally
interesting
he thought much about he thought much
about I've been thinking lately about
Plato of oh how that so he wrote all
that right right
have you thought much about what it was
like to be Plato like in in what it
would sit down to write those down cuz I
you know I just don't think it's
reasonable to say oh oh my god it's been
two and a half hours Jesus I have
somebody waiting in them oh really
oh well we'll put a pin in that then
shall we good conversation it has it has
yeah it has please okay well okay I'll
I'll I'll send this to you also most you
sure let me know where I should drove it
you have Dropbox yeah I think so okay or
ever friend okay my friend this is okay
it's like it was just like pretend like
we're going back in the distance getting
up from the couch stretching you know
don't forgetting my aunt might now
emptied glass back on the table because
it's sure empty by now and saying thank
you for your great hospitality yes oh oh
you always really sorry the house is so
messy
it's okay mine's worse and you know I'll
swing by again next week
and rap on your door all right talk to
you later what Fred okay take care