[Music]
hello this is Eric with a few thoughts
for our housekeeping section this week
as this is our second episode to be
released during a bizarre and near
global patchwork of local quarantines I
wanted to update you on my evolving
thinking and understanding surrounding
our shared pandemic but perhaps more
importantly I want to begin putting this
response to the virus in the context of
what we've already talked about in the
portal in particular the disc or
distributed idea suppression complex
introduced in episode 18 appears to be
in full swing so how do we know that
this is happening
well Twitter and this is just as an
example has now refined their Terms of
Service to broaden their definition of
harm itself to address in their words
and I quote content that goes directly
against guidance from authoritative
sources of global and local public
health information rather than reports
we will enforce this in close
coordination with trusted partners
including public health authorities and
governments and continue to use and
consult with information from those
sources when reviewing content under
this new guidance we will require people
to removed wheats now of course in a
pandemic that sounds sensible at least
in my ears in such a situation
who wants marginal gadflies like I don't
know Mike Serna vichaar the infamous
mensches mole bug aka courtesy Arvin
contradicting the mayor of New York City
bill de blasio or the Washington Post in
a time crying out for coordinated and
authoritative response well here's the
awkward part many of the people who call
this epidemic early and correctly were
the very marginal Internet personalities
that the legacy media folks loved to
deride as trolls grifters and gadfly's
as for the mayor of New York City
well after Serna vich and mold bug had
correctly called for drastic action bill
de blasio wrote I'm encouraging New
Yorkers to go on with your lives and get
out on the town despite coronavirus and
that was in early March a sentiment that
was echoed by the Washington Post that
viewed concern over the virus as a kind
of neurosis that had to be addressed
psychologically in short the gated
institutional narrative or jinn was not
close to being the first to see kovat as
the giant threat requiring a planet
a response it was those outside the gin
that not only saw this early but proved
that it was seeable early by many
different individuals who generally
seemed to sit outside the institutional
and respectable worlds so just why was
this well first of all the portal has
argued many times before that we have
had an almost universally unworkable
leadership class now in place for just
under 50 years that it arose to disguise
the end of the post-war economic growth
regime this is a collection of people
who have refactored the institutions
that they've led within our system
specifically to evade the embedded
growth obligations or egos that were set
in the previous era and who rewarded
each other generally for doing exactly
the wrong things in terms of the public
good with an end to mandatory
retirements the same people have been
promoted for borrowing against the
future and playing games of Russian
roulette with financial markets in
health care while self dealing within
the system that they were handed
stewards for the generations to come
serving a false god a fake economic
efficiency that reliably and
deliberately fails to adequately
incorporate actual economics like
negative externalities of anointment
Morgenstern sub utility functions
principal agent problems moral hazard
etc etc our ubiquitous economists have
hidden behind the mask of technocrats
working for the public good
while merely pretending to practice
their own profession health care
mandarins to regularly ignore the
warnings coming out of their own
literature
I mean heading over to Google Scholar
which readiness czar or hospital head
could forget titles like mechanical
ventilation in an airborne epidemic by
fuáá in 2008 or preparing intensive care
for the next pandemic influenza by
Taylor Kane and Robert Fowler in 2019
were those back-to-back hits of Meltzer
at all stockpiling ventilators for
influenza pandemics and estimates of the
demand for mechanical ventilation in the
United States during an influenza
pandemic in 2017 and 2015 respectively
in short we got here not because we
couldn't foresee this future in fact we
extensively studied it we got here
because we decided to ignore the future
that we knew was coming the specific
class of people that we had at the helm
of our institutions were
constitutionally incapable of putting
their foot down and asserting that we
needed deeper reserves
in order to handle what they called
surge capacity so do I know what's going
on what I said during this section of
our last episode still holds true this
week my continuing discussions with a
number of people I respect deeply seems
surprisingly inconclusive to me even at
this late date so my mind wanders to the
second-order question of why it would be
so difficult to sketch a straightforward
narrative to guide us in fact dr. Peter
Tia's most recent video evidences some
of this confusion where he shares that
as a physician he feels so spun around
by what he is hearing that even he is
forced to think in political rather than
medical or scientific terms to explain
the situation to oversimplify slightly
there are three great risks with the
Cove advice one of under-reaction one of
overreaction and one of inappropriate
reaction the first threatens an enormous
body count from the virus with severe
respiratory and other damage to many of
the recovered the second threatens a
worldwide depression which could well
lead to armed clashes and even Wars of
various sizes the last leads to many of
our efforts being wasted or even
captured by profit ears at a time when
we are demanded not too deeply
questioned the coordinating authorities
and oddly we are being prepared to
participate in both under and over
reactions simultaneously just as many of
us are worrying about allocations of
financial assistance that are now valued
in the trillions I mean this is crazy at
some level no we are somehow discussing
ill-conceived multi trillion-dollar
assistance packages at the same time as
we are being ready to go back to work
while also hearing that New York is now
apocalyptic I mean that's pretty
confusing we are going to transfer vast
amounts of wealth so please know that
everything will be fine when you get
back to work shortly but in the meantime
the borough of Queens is experiencing
Armageddon even by high school dating
standards that's a lot of mixed in
conflicting messages now what could
explain this odd state of affairs I
found myself compelled by a very simple
idea from whose grip I cannot easily
escape the idea is straightforward what
if our leadership is treating this as
much as an accountability crisis as a
medical one when it comes to their
actions I mean what if the issue over
which we are being quarantined isn't
actually the number of deaths they are
trying to prevent but the type of deaths
perhaps there is one special category of
death then that our leaders are more
afraid of than all others for reasons of
accountability rather than simple loss
of life in order to explore this idea it
might help to make it somewhat concrete
therefore imagine that you had drafted a
blank tweet on Twitter called New York
blue check death list for at least my
early well-known accounts that you
follow from New York State that are
eventually brought low by the kovat
virus and that it initially has no other
content of course it would start out
blank but now imagine that every time
one of these account owners dies of
kovat you plan to add them to your
soon-to-be growing list that's pretty
morbid but hey it's now a pandemic after
all oddly these aren't even really the
death that I'm talking about quite yet
perhaps the first few are old people who
have lived long and full lives but as
your list begins to fill up there may
come a first gruesome death that
happened to a vital younger person who
desperately needed a ventilator or an
ICU bed or a trained MD or nurse to have
a fighting chance let us call these
triage deaths if they result from a
missing resource that could have and
should have been stocked for just such
emergencies these losses are beginning
to outline the class of death that I
believe may now be driving this
difficult to understand response from
our political and medical leadership
while deaths from the virus may be
tragic these specific triage deaths may
be considered career-ending deaths of
accountability for medical scientific
business and political leaders who
specifically failed to heed warnings
from the group studying our preparedness
as such they may have mattered most in
determining the shape of our current
response as they are all death to come
from failing to implement copious
previous work in identifying our
vulnerabilities meant to shape our
disaster preparedness these would be
quite bad because they would involve
people that we feel we know but it could
actually get much worse for our leaders
than that if you were now to swap out
the blue check requirement and exchange
it instead for I don't know the most
sympathetic person you could imagine
what happens when death swoops down on a
young girl of eight named Aruna who
needs a ventilator desperately but can't
get one or perhaps the entire Gomez
family is turned away from a Queen's er
or made to wait for ICU beds that never
materialize while there's still time to
save three out of their four men
I mean what if it is these triage deaths
which are actually closer to negligent
homicide than mere viral losses that are
actually terrifying our leaders into
draconian action rather than the total
number of dead as they say this
hypothesis has the advantage of at least
being consistent with the otherwise
confusing and seemingly conflicting
themes developed before burdens from our
leaders who were caught having uh Turley
failed in their mission to keep us
prepared would have to be shifted on to
our entire society as a whole
think about it the public would be asked
for broad participation in something
like flatten the curve and why to cover
for the lack of the same ICU beds masks
PPE and ventilators that were called for
in numerous academic papers over the
last twenty years studying just such
viral pandemic scenarios I mean it's
really quite close as the authorities
now scramble at top speed to finally get
the missing resources in place that
should have been banked all along they
would also simultaneously be preparing
us to go back to work to risk regular
viral rather than triage deaths just as
soon as the shortfalls could be made up
as there doesn't seem to be a highly
credible plan to defeat the virus to see
the implications of this triage death
avoidance hypothesis conduct a thought
experiment imagine that all of the
rate-limiting resources for efficient
ICU treatment were suddenly parachuted
out on pallets from helicopters all over
the world the question is would we
continue to shelter in place given that
we have no cure or vaccine or would we
be told to toughen up and go back to
work now
I don't know the answer but I believe
the question is not devoid of interest
think about it I will as well
[Music]
this episode introduces a relatively
unknown guest to our portal audience now
many of you are familiar with the
concept of true fame versus other kinds
of fame for example there's big in
Europe or internet famous well in a
certain West Coast subculture there is a
concept of California famous and such
names would include Laura Deming Michael
Vassar eliezer yudkowsky Alex green
currently in federal prison Jordan green
Hall Julia Galef Tristan Harris Daniel
barkay Tom Chee Grant Sanderson Rick
Doblin Brett Victor and many others my
guest on this episode is my friend
Danish Mactan Berger an important node
in the system now the odd thing about
Daniel is that wherever he or I found
ourselves riffing with others on topics
existential someone would often tell us
about the other and that we needed to
become friends as well and I think that
was probably a pretty good call on their
part I have sat on this episode for
months however because I was hoping that
I would have a second chance to record
with Daniel given that he was on very
little sleep from the night before this
discussion was recorded however we now
find ourselves in a viral outbreak and
Daniel is one of the few people I deal
with trying to make progress on how
humans can have a permanent future on
this small and dangerous planet
particularly amidst the fatal
temptations of nuclear and biological
warfare which I have termed the twin
nuclei problem elsewhere
now the corona virus may or may not turn
out to be related to laboratory strains
but the problems it poses and
foreshadows are directly within or
adjacent to Daniels area of focus Daniel
in particular favors the wisdom and
design branch of the human fated
decision tree a branch that I think
probably deserves the second most
attention after my personal favorite
which is the need for new physics with
the possibility of escape to the distant
cosmos that is Daniel is searching for
something like the wisdom needed to
re-engineer a non rival risk or ante
rivalry society to live in harmony with
its newfound godlike powers sometimes
the search for a so-called escape
through wisdom goes under the name of
game B now the idea behind game B is
something like the following natural and
sexual selection must be assumed to have
engineered us
for a cycle of competition and misery
which we might term game a played read
of tooth and claw under the law of the
jungle game B is by contrast a mythical
second state where the agents originally
built within game a teach themselves to
do something far less brutal rivalries
unsustainable and wasteful but without
themselves getting out competed by those
who wish to remain in game a as such
game B Falls clearly within the confines
of the so called human potential
movement while I have taken an interest
in this counterculture I am NOT myself a
part of it as I fear that it does not
fully make sense to me the game B is
really a possibility nevertheless the
quest for a less rival risk world is
probably a noble one in one of which I'm
at least partially personally supportive
in any event I thought that this is the
episode that is probably most in keeping
with the semi apocalyptic mood that many
of us find ourselves within during these
days of quarantine I don't know if it
will be everyone's cup of tea but I
think daniel has many interesting
perspectives and it is a pleasure to
introduce him to our portal community so
please sit back and relax as we bring
you an uninterrupted discussion with
Daniel 'shmock dan Berger hello you
found the portal I'm your host Eric
Weinstein and today we'll be sitting
down with a name that will not be
familiar to many of you
my friend daniel trachtenberg Daniel
welcome to the portal thanks for having
me Eric so Daniel I have to admit that
the way in which I came to know you was
a little bit odd I would start to talk
about various ideas and people would
simply say to me that's really
interesting have you ever talked to
Daniel 'shmock did Berger and so far as
I knew you weren't affiliated with any
famous institution you did not have a
large outreach into the public and yet
somehow my network was very attuned to
your thinking do you have any sense of
what it was that caused your name among
all names
to come up frequently in context that we
share well I think we just we do happen
to have some good friends in common and
people who have similar interests in
terms of how to do better thinking how
to make civilization better make society
better concerns about civilization risk
and probably mostly have friends that
appreciate heterodox thinking but clear
heterodox thinking and yeah my my goal
was never a lot of broadcast my goal was
to communicate with people that I also
thought were earnestly endeavoring to
think well and see if we could think
better about things and maybe make
progress on things together well I
suppose that the way I view it is that
there are very few people at the moment
who are really trying to integrate any
kind of rigorous thinking across many
different disciplines to solve what I
would think would be society wide
problems and opportunities for everybody
and I find that very surprising because
we keep being told what a prosperous
society we are and you would think that
in a prosperous society there would be
lots of people experimenting with
radically new ideas about societal
organization at any given time given
that so much is on the line whenever we
talk about climate or multipolar
geopolitical conflict it seems very
strange that there are so few people who
are interested in what I would think are
the existential questions for humans do
you find first of all that you think
that that our our world in our society
is thinking properly about where it is
and at this point in human history ah no
I obviously don't think that we're
thinking very well about it most any of
the schools
not the kind of environmental
reactionary not the left not the right
not the techno capitalist cingulate
Aryan optimists I think there is some
signal and a good bit of noise and also
not just epistemic bias but epistemic
inadequacy coming from whatever domain
specialty looking at something that's so
much more complex than any domain
specialty by itself is going to do a
good job of I think you speak well to
why there are not more different ideas
trying to figure things out is you end
up getting some kind of dominant system
that is this autopoietic it's
self-perpetuating and so then it's you
want to say what what you mean by
autopoietic yes self-perpetuating self
authoring and so let's and when we say
system it's like what system we talk
about the academic system are we talking
about the monetary system are we talking
about our government system are we
talking about culture are we talking
about media and information
communication and it's yes it's the
intersection of all those into a kind of
civilizational system and that I think
can be best thought of if we want to
think of it in simple terms as the
system that confers power to things and
so of course everything that supports
that system gets more power within the
system and everything that would
possibly threaten the core relevancy or
validity of the system threatens people
who are doing well in the system and so
it gets kind of spit out by the system
and so I think that's a very strong
normative force all right so let me let
me give a little bit of my frame we can
try to pass things back and forth and
feel free to take over if you like but
here's what I see that I think of is
being really interesting and rather
mysterious I see a decision tree in
which I think at a society-wide level I
can't accept any of the major branches
so one branch would be that we have a
self-extinguishing human event let's say
an all-out nuclear war where people
miscalculate
and the planet is unrecognizable then
there's a different branch that says
that there's some sort of a
environmental collapse maybe with a
nuclear exchange or some sort of
synthetic biology who knows what where
there are survivors but it's not it's
not the world that we see at our window
here then there's another one which says
maybe we managed to trundle on for
another thousand years
somehow limping along without any major
new ideas we're still using markets
things are getting incrementally better
maybe there some big breakthroughs here
and there but there's no big
breakthrough in human wisdom so that we
have the same dangerous objects but we
continue to be lucky that nobody
weaponize 'as these things and that
there's no broad collapse then there's
an escape branch where we we end up on
Mars or maybe we escape even farther out
in the universe or maybe we get uploaded
into silicon there's no part of this
tree that looks sensible to me every
single branch is somewhere in sci-fi are
you seeing something well it looks like
that or do you have some branches that
you think are more probable and more
hopeful more hopeful yes probable no but
I can't do a probability calculation
because they're unprecedented so I don't
have priors after you have to impute
yeah so the first two that you said
existential risk and catastrophic risk
this certainly lots of different ways
for both of those to occur they get that
are getting increasingly likely I hope
time goes on as I model it and I think
we should get into that the idea that it
continues relatively similar to how it
is for a thousand years I don't see
possible at all and I can say why I
think this civilization system is
actually self terminating in a much
shorter time than that inexorably like
there is no way that it could continue
for very long and so the escape models
I'm fairly dubious of not because we
couldn't with near-term tech get some
people into space but we certainly
couldn't get something that doesn't
depend on earth that if we things
up here it's doing well within the time
frames that I think will things up
on earth
at least the trajectory as I see it so
then the question you asked is there
some other thing like progress to a
totally different type of social system
here or totally different type of
civilization system that can continue
for a long time that isn't self
terminating and it isn't generating
catastrophic and existential risks as
the byproduct of the architecture of the
system itself is really the only path so
you know what I spend most of my time
working on is what the architectures of
a system like that must be and what the
transition would look like so I'm quite
happy with that description and that
also sort of sets up what at least our
initial superficial division is that is
that of the branches of the decision
tree that I can't accept the most
hopeful branch to me is that we learn
our source code and use it to do
something that it has never been done
but something that has never been done
before which is potentially travel
outside the solar system or potentially
through some as yet unknown physical
possibility you have an idea about
hacking social systems with so far our
biology the way it is in our structure
the way it is in our in our governance
but somehow delivering us to a new
structure I don't know whether that's
going to be through human enhancement
through a cultural change through Rhian
scent of izing the world so am i right
that those those those I I think that
your branch of the decision tree is very
interesting I just I'm very pessimistic
about it and I think you should be
pessimistic about mine
well when you say hacking the source
code you mean the source code of physics
so we can get something like a warp
drive and I'm down right like I'll
totally work with you on a galactic
Cruiser if we can do that too that's a
warp drive but okay the placeholder is a
placeholder okay I think the thing that
I'm talking about also requires
something like understanding source code
at
front level sure not source code of
physics but source code of things
related you yeah
psychology and evolution and the nature
of tool-making and the nature of
collective sense making in choice making
type dynamics okay and but to start to
go into what it would look like we have
to do I would have to to have it make
any sense describe what I think the
problems are why the current system is
self terminating and why all the systems
that we have ever had have been self
terminating because God actually defined
the problem properly to be able to say
because that gives me necessary and
sufficient criteria for what an adequate
solution would have to address you're
teeing up my next question which is take
us through your reasoning as to why we
can't luck out over several hundred
years and simply kind of bumble on as
before okay a couple different ways of
looking at this that all converge if we
look at the kind of Club of Rome limits
of growth type model I think that this
is more fundamental than we're used to
thinking about so you and Peter were
talking the other day about the need for
ongoing zazz a peter thiel for those who
haven't seen the inaugural episode of
the show talking about the need for
ongoing economic growth so that we can
stay in positive some dynamics because
if we don't have economic growth and
people keep wanting more stuff and it
goes zero-sum in that creates conflict
so just to make sure there were I'm
understanding your terminology positive
some dynamics means that whatever the
mythical PI of it keeps getting bigger
yes okay and I think that obviously we
can go positive some and still have it
all be captured by a few right like not
actually have anything like appropriate
to distribution and we know that wealth
has a power-law distribution and there's
some very fundamental things about why
it's always going to have a power-law
distribution if it has social
architectures like some currently how
I'm comfortable with this but by
power-law distribution we mean that the
the winners
are so much bigger as winners than let's
say a normal probability a normal
bell-shaped curve right would tell us
the curve looks like this you have a few
people who have almost everything and
most people have quite little and that
as you know if we look at like the
increase in wealth that has happened
since the internet it has not been
pretty evenly distributed over most of
the people it's been you know increasing
wealth and ability is there a name for
the pie that's growing but we're almost
everybody slice except for a few
people's is shrinking well I mean we
could call it global GDP is one very
simplified metric and we can say okay so
we want global GDP to increase because
that represents total goods and services
that represent some way of thinking
about value it's a really bad way of
thinking about value and I think we
should discuss that okay if obviously up
until the Industrial Revolution they
were about a half a billion people on
the planet at most okay and then we go
as soon as the Industrial ushion and our
ability to extract resources at faster
than their reproduction amounts from the
biosphere we go from half a billion
people over whatever three hundred
thousand years of Homo Sapien history to
eight billion people in almost no time
at all and so that's like there's a real
issue there that is we are subsidizing
our growth with savings accounts that
are finite and this a bunch of different
ways of thinking about that but if we
look at biodiversity loss or species
extinction or growing dead zones in the
ocean or any of these issues not just
climate change we can see that we have
we have a linear materials economy that
takes resources from the earth unruhe
new ibly and produces a bunch of
pollution waste heat whatever in the
process of manufacturing transportation
and then turns them into trash on this
side and so we get both accumulation
dynamics and depletion dynamics and you
can't keep running accumulation and
lesion dynamics on a finite biosphere
indefinitely okay now of course you see
the the immediate next argument which is
make a closed-loop economy well that you
you needed to burn fossil fuels for a
period of time in order to become
wealthy enough to figure out how to do
something clean green and sustainable
right and so the idea is that these are
really just intermediate phases and it
looks pretty dirty and grubby now but in
fact good news human human ingenuity is
boundless and so we'll just think our
way out of whatever new problems we've
created so we can all easily say we
can't keep running a linear materials
economy with exponential growth on the
planet that's pretty straightforward and
that we're actually very near limits of
our capacity to keep doing that on a
bunch of different atomic cycles so then
we say okay well we have to go
closed-loop where the new stuff that we
make comes from the old stuff that old
stuff turns into new stuff and that
we're able to do that closed loop
cycling of matter using renewable energy
and so this is one necessary dynamic but
this already doesn't look like the model
that you're mentioning of society
hobbling along mostly the same because
that's actually really really different
that would already be a significant
change not maybe a significant as a warp
drive but it would be a fundamentally
different type of civilization okay
and so I would say that that movement to
a closed loop materials economy is
necessary but no we're close to
sufficient one one thing that's going to
come is if I want to run anything like
capitalism just from a materials economy
basis where I'm going to have to keep
growing the capital supply year over
year just to keep up with interest right
you there's an exponential expansion of
the monetary basis that is required for
capitalism to exist so then to not
debase the currency we have to keep
growing the goods and services and I
can't actually in a closed-loop
materials economy that is near the
carrying capacity I can't keep growing
the goods and services indefinitely so
then of course the argument is well
we can do it almost all digitally and
this a bit of a complex argument but I
would say there are some coupling
coefficients between how much virtual
value we have that keeps being valued
that doesn't go into diminishing returns
relative to how much physical value that
there's some coupling coefficients
between atoms energy and bits that make
up the materials economy and then also
time human attention so I don't think
that we can keep running a exponential
capital expansion but I'll make a
simpler argument capitalism and
nationalism but feudalism is also an
example our rival risk game theoretic
structures some in group competing
against somehow group and we can play
coordination games where we'll
coordinate with each other if it's more
advantageous but we reserve the right to
defect and go zero-sum on each other if
that's more advantageous and we have
been employing more and more powerful
technology to play rival risk games that
means more and more potent warfare more
and more potent extraction environmental
extraction and more and more potent
information tech that can do narrative
and information warfare narrative
control something else say is that rival
risk game dynamics necessarily are
causing some harm in the system either
I'm harming you directly you're harming
me or we're externalizing harm to a
Commons and information or an ecological
Commons
you can't keep externalizing harm
exponentially and so rival risk game
dynamics multiplied by exponential tech
end up self terminating we can't do
exponential warfare exponential
extraction or exponential disinformation
we've already gotten so far with
exponential disinformation that we
almost can't make sense of anything
because you have a system that in sense
disinformation okay well this is the
first place that I start to hear an
argument that has a hope of dealing with
the congenital institutional optimism
sure there are naysayers but I say that
the America's greatest days are in front
of her
have we not always found salut
to our problems on you you know you cue
the the brass band and everybody feels
enlivened and I always found these
arguments kind of bizarre not that
things haven't worked out I think things
have worked out to be honest quite a bit
better than I would have ever predicted
if you'd put me down in 1945 and said
what's gonna happen over the next 50
years let's be honest we've been pretty
lucky and it's been pretty pretty
terrific on balance that said I also
can't figure out a way in which we just
become more powerful and our ability to
extract our ability to confuse our
ability to mete out harm from the strong
to the weak so my guess is that even if
I guessed wrong again and we could get
another 50 years out of it sooner or
later either something like what you're
talking about a change in the basic
structure of rival risk interaction
maybe we should talk a little bit about
what what that means but I think people
probably into it or you know just
requires an increasing amount of luck as
we get farther away from the events that
may have caused the last 50 years I
think that people who had direct
experience of the depression in World
War two and maybe World War one they
weren't fooled into thinking that this
was an easy game and that life was
simple they had had enough primary
experience with really catastrophic
events that they knew that they were
playing with the full stack okay there's
a there's a bunch of directions that I'm
interested in going so one is World War
2 was the first time that we actually
had existential level technology as the
species in our recorded history that's a
big deal because we couldn't have
actually blown ourselves up before then
and in evolutionary time or even
civilization time that's just like a few
minutes right like this not very long
that we've had that I agree and if you
read like if you read Ellsberg's
doomsday machine it is kind of lucky
that we haven't blown ourselves up
because there were a lot of just
mistakes it should have blown
right but it's really hard to build
nukes right it really takes nation state
level capacity and mostly only a few
nation states so could do it yeah and
this is the point is that if you only
have a few actors that have nukes
everybody can monitor each other and
have something like mutually assured
destruction to force an equilibrium but
this is the thing about exponential tech
is we don't just get exponentially more
powerful tech we get exponentially more
distribution on powerful tech Daniel I
want to keep going with this but I'm
gonna keep slowing you down when you use
a term that may not be familiar to a
sufficient number of our listeners what
do you mean by X is exponential tech so
tech that helps us make better tech so
we get a return curve on the technology
so we see this kind of exponential the
very famously Moore's law in computing
we see this kind of exponential rate of
growth of computing power because like
nuclear bombs don't actually give us
better insight into how to make nuclear
bombs directly but computers give us
better insight into how to make better
computers and so there are different
areas of exponential tech where the
technology itself increases our capacity
to make more of the technology or some
underlying dynamic where we get some
exponential increases in our capacity so
we can see for varying reasons
exponential increases in compute power
exponential increases in certain types
of biotech like specifically things
associated with like CRISPR genetic
engineering gene drives nanotech and
those things all you get Exponential's
also because they're we're dealing with
things that could self replicate right
and so a nuclear bomb is a big deal but
it doesn't self replicate but a
synthetic biology device can self
replicate or a genetically engineered
thing can and so we can have exponential
growth of the effect of something and so
if we if we take a look at the growth in
biotechnology capacity and we
specifically look at breakthroughs like
CRISPR tech
and the capacity for things like gene
drives to be able to modify foundational
biology well that makes it to where by a
warfare capacity like very high level by
a warfare capacity becomes much much
much simpler so things that
nation-states used to be able to do non
nation-states are gaining the capacity
to be able to do even drone tech like we
had the the first everybody's who's
thought about it has been like when are
we going to have a really big problem
with drones and a couple years ago was
the first time in the Ukraine where a
commercial drone with a homemade
thermite bomb dropped it on a munitions
factory and because they had a munitions
factory and detonated the whole thing
you get a billion dollars of damage from
just they can be one person doing a very
simple thing in their garage with out
any kind of really traceable exotic
materials but we can do we can we can do
much worse things than that with
exponentially increasing technological
power so the main thing when I say
exponential tech is just we are getting
an exponential increase in how powerful
the choices we make can be and that's a
good way to think about technology as a
lever on our choice making right so no
technology at all
I can make different choices if I want
to be violent I can hit somebody stone
tool allows me to extend my hitting
capacity and hit much harder right a gun
takes that much further and an
intercontinental ballistic missile takes
that much further which it's a similar
type of choice to make which is solve
this problem through violence extended
by a much much bigger lever and what I
would say is if you look at the kind of
people we have ever been like look at
the Romans look at the Sumerians look at
the mines look at any kind of people
we've been and look at the distribution
of ways we've made choices take any of
those people and give them exponentially
more power
factoring how they've used their power
and they self-terminate like they don't
use they're not good stewards of power
and well I agree that we're not good
stewards of power I think that there is
a mystery here that if we don't make eye
contact with it it's going to dog the
conversation we've got a lot of missing
Stinger missiles I believe from the
Afghan
Theatre during the time that we were
arming the Mujahideen I don't know how
many but I think I heard that it was in
the hundreds yet we didn't see a ton of
use maybe you know TWA flight 800 had
something to do with it maybe not we
don't know it's a mysterious situation
there are plenty of reservoirs to poison
people always talked about that we
haven't seen that behavior it seems to
me that these terrible shootings that we
experienced I'm always astounded that
the numbers are as low as they are and
you could make an argument that said
that in general people who are not in a
position to benefit or engaged in some
sort of self terminating activity people
who are planning to go out with a with a
bang if you will are not very successful
usually in doing huge amounts of damage
now that may change so like we know that
from the murrah Federal Building that
fertilizer is a pretty potent bomb
ingredient and yet we didn't see a huge
string of copycats after that is there
something in us that is sort of capable
in an act of desperation and depression
of killing tens of people that struggles
to kill thousands or millions you
understand the Quai is a mystery yeah no
I think there's some positive things we
have going for us which is there
generally tends to be an inverse
correlation between people who are
really good at tech and people who want
to blow things up like typically those
the people who want to blow things up
mostly don't figure out how to make
really good bioweapons right and the
people who are really engaged in how to
make more powerful breakthroughs in
science and tech are usually engaged in
some creative enterprise where they're
not oriented to blow things up that's
actually like really
important I think that's going well for
us I think that depends upon certain
social things staying in place that we
can't guarantee are going to stay so
Jays a relatively viable society for the
people who have the technological
capacities I this is something that
fascinates me we seem to be very willing
to destroy the lives of very capable
people these days yeah III and I always
wonder like are we going to be surprised
when somebody whose life we've ruined
over nothing comes back at us and saying
wow you really you wrote me off and you
destroyed my reputation my ability to
earn a living I can't have a security
clearance I can't do what it is that I
enjoy doing and now I'm on the outs I am
terrified for example then you know the
famously the James d'amore situation
where you start going after very bright
sort of spectrum II people and you tell
them that they're horrible and you ruin
them publicly that's a very bad recipe I
think it is a bad recipe and and of
course James de Moura is not a
particular risk but there are a lot of
people who are very capable yeah who
took one look at that situation said oh
so now no longer can I be can I count on
getting things largely right maybe I get
some stuff wrong around the edges but no
longer can I count on making interesting
points and having a job when I get up
the next morning well like when you're
mentioning shootings if I can just go
buy an ar-15 even if I don't know how to
make one right then I can kill a lot
more people than I can with a knife
right and so the that's an increase in
technological capacity that can empower
someone who is psychologically damaged
somehow to be able to do things they
couldn't do without it and I think as
more powerful technology requires less
scientific insight to be able to modify
then you're certainly going to see more
those types of dynamics increase I think
one of the other things is that when we
think about the Cold War we really had
two nuclear superpowers that could be
locked and mutually assured destruction
because with just two forces you kind of
have an easy Nash equilibrium but as
soon as you have a lot of forces and
it's more multipolar it's a much much
harder thing this is the thing that
terrifies me which is that I would much
rather have two very skilled hyper
lethal powers in some kind of weird
community game theoretic communication
with each other then lots of less
skilled players with much less power but
significant ability to do damage right
which we have now you know and we have
increasingly so right so we went from
one country with nukes at the end of
World War two to then too quickly in
Cold War type dynamics to you know
whatever nine on record if you don't
count where all the missing uranium from
the USSR that is in whatever place is
that it's in that and that we're not
just talking about nukes we're talking
about lots of other things so I think I
think the gist is that rival risk type
dynamics whether we're talking about a
rivalry that's a kinetic warfare like
this right like a physical warfare right
or an economic warfare or an information
warfare end up resulting in
progressively more harm as we have more
power because the gist is if we're in
some kind of warfare of whatever kind
then I need to figure out some
asymmetric capacity to be able to beat
you but the moment I deploy that
asymmetric capacity it gets reverse
engineered by all sides and up ratcheted
so we get this exponential up ratcheting
of the game the power itself yeah if it
doesn't in the game right and and that's
what we see is we see an exponential
increase in destructive capacity without
a fundamental change in the basis of how
we use it so let's just look at
information tech and I think this is
really key to the how we change
civilization part if information about
reality is a source of competitive
advantage like from I know where the
water is and so but we don't think
there's enough for everybody so not only
do we want to withhold that information
from the other tribe we want to
misinform them as to where it is so they
don't accidentally find it right you see
in every competitive game whether it's a
poker bluff or a football game or you
fake one way and go the other way
a incentive to dis inform right and as
we start having exponential information
texts so we can intentionally dis inform
specific audiences in ways that are much
more believable to them so you talk
about Russell conjugation Russell
conjugation is you want to I don't know
that we've talked about it too much on
this program you do a great job with it
I since you're gonna take it somewhere
1e
when do you say a little bit of what it
is I can dis inform without even lying
yeah right I can formally lie but I can
also just make someone more likely to
interpret something in a particular way
by couching a question or couching an
idea in a way that's likely to bring a
reaction so you gave I think a great
example of if I talk about illegal
aliens the problem of illegal aliens
versus the need for amnesty for migrant
workers undocumented work undocumented
workers then just the nature of the
wording choice on the exact same reality
evokes very different kinds of
sensibilities and people so they'll vote
differently they'll poll differently so
it's pretty easy to influence what
people think and how they feel through
of course lying but also through not
just lying but sharing partial data so
the preponderance of data gives them a
sense of things that is other than it
really is and through things like
Russell conjugation where we're really
just kind of hijacking their limbic
system a very fun very funny one is the
use of the Democrat Party where you
emphasize the word rat rather than
saying the Democratic Party and so it's
great fun for Republicans to say yes the
Democrat can't you know it's a whoa that
doesn't sound good
and yet it's a defensible position what
are you talking about it's just the way
I say it right okay so a plausible
deniability on engaging in a kind of
narrative warfare right and it's
supposed to be that we're both on Team
USA right working together to make the
best country possible maybe in rivalry
with other countries but hopefully even
in some kind of economic trade
prosperous relationship right but we're
obviously not both on Team USA we're
actually engaged in really dreadful
zero-sum dynamics with each other well
intentionally confusing and misinforming
the public and increasing animosity even
towards the point of civil conflict for
some game theoretic win for our team
mm-hmm and we see that that's not just
true with Republican and Democrat but
even like mmm multiple intelligence
agencies it should be sharing
intelligence perfectly with each other
but they're actually competing for who
gets a larger percentage of the black
budget so they'll withhold information
and maybe even engage in internal
espionage all the way it's just like
corporate politics where people aren't
really making a choice in a big
corporation of what's best for the
corporation as a whole they're making
choices that are best for them and their
boss their fealty relationships in and
then engaging in corporate politics it
might actually be hurting the company so
long as they can have plausible
deniability to get away with it so
whenever we have perverse incentives
we're gonna have some situation by which
we're being incentivized by a system of
selective pressures to do certain things
that may not be in the stated interests
or the you know whatever the directive
is of our of our institution so the
directive is to do the business of the
country but in fact you're loyal to the
team that you're on because that's what
brought you to this place and it were
you to lose your team inside of this
internal game you couldn't really
function
yeah and it's actually not even the
fault of some bad people it's a fault of
a system where it's like I say okay well
if I don't do that then I lose the game
to the other guys that are doing that
and I actually think I'm more qualified
to get that promotion than he is so this
is the compromise I have to make which
is which is this
we could think of as politics right my
brother is called this I think is a
beautiful job describing this he called
this the personal responsibility vortex
where if you start behaving if you
listen to people to say well you know
even if you're incentivized to do the
wrong thing you should still do the
right thing
yeah Brett's point was if that becomes
self-extinguishing then you'll simply be
replaced by something less ethical than
you are so it's actually incumbent upon
you not to be so virtuous that you
remove yourself from the game leaving
open a niche for some less scrupulous
person to swoop it so this is how an
unethical system convinces ethical
people to compromise their ethics to
become a tool for the system well he's
so this is this this big division that's
coming up which is that what we call
democracy and capitalism and the
Enlightenment and all of these things
that we've been able to do up until this
point some people in our mutual world it
might be vaguely affiliated with the
human potential movement that's the
closest giant umbrella rubric that I can
put over it some percentage of those
people refer to this world that we have
now as game a and then there's this
hypothetical game B which might not be
rival risk and hopefully isn't self
extinguishing and it might not be
entirely market-based or maybe the
markets taken to better account of
things like resource questions and
negative externalities are you are you
hopeful about game B is that a good way
of phrasing it is there a better way of
talking about this he yes and to be able
to define what game B what criteria must
have understanding the thing that is
self extinguishing in game a like let's
take a couple of the examples you just
gave and go a little further because
there there were a along lines connected
to where we were you talk about
internalizing externalities
right so if I if I am figuring out how
to externalize some cost of the thing
that I'm doing to the Commons and so for
example you're polluting as part of a
furniture plant that employs lots of
people and make something people need
right so there's a real cost right it
there's a cost to a whole ecosystem into
the people into the future generations
it'll be affected by the pollution but I
don't pay the cost and because I'm not
paying the cost I get to have the profit
margins that I have if I had to pay the
cost which mean I had the employ a
technology that currently exists to
clean all that up and whatever that
costs my business might be radically not
profitable right now so so then maybe
we'll try and create a law to make it to
where I can't do that pollution but I'm
not doing the pollution as a person I
have some corporation that has some
liability limiting functions of any of
the people within the corporation so the
corporation is breaking the law and you
can't put a corporation in jail so
there's a fine but if the fine is less
expensive than processing the waste
would be even it's just a cost of doing
business and then the corporation will
employ lobbyists to go change the law
because laws are going to be created by
lobbyists that are paid for by somebody
and they're going to be created by
politicians who have a campaign budget
that is controlled by somebody so
basically economics has perverse
incentives we try to create law to bind
it but economics is deeper in the stack
of power than law is so you end up
getting this legal system that is
supposed to bind the perverse economic
incentive that mostly ends up
legislating and in the benefit of it so
it but and this is a fundamental problem
with the liberal democracy idea well
when things get really visual things can
actually change if you start being able
to point to oh I don't know let's say
children with malformed limbs that
happen with filete imide the visual on
that was enough to push that up the
attention stack
to say hey we've got a serious problem
here and we've got to talk about this
right now because the the externality of
this pharmaceutical is is horrific do
you have anything better than waiting
for absolutely horrendous things with
the with visuals that that hit oh yeah
so you know it's funny right like we see
ads from the 50s we're better living
through chemistry and people are
spraying DDT on the kids to keep the
mosquitoes off and then we recognize how
lethal the DDT is so then we sell it to
Mexico that doesn't have the law and
then we buy the produce back from Mexico
but then we come up with some new
chemical that we say is less toxic just
because the long term Studies on its
toxicity haven't come out yet and mostly
they don't look as visible as
thalidomide this is the thing we
sometimes I say this as we keep
searching for our own blind spot so that
we can do business there right and so
what it is that we can't measure very
often becomes a place to do business
because almost everything produces
negative externalities and so it has to
be disguised now this is a concept I
wanted to bring up in terms of what
you're saying about your brother and so
there's this idea of a multipolar trap
which is some scenario where some agent
in the system whether the agent is a
person or a nation or a tribe or a
corporation does something that is
really bad for the whole over the long
term but it's actually really
advantageous to them over the near term
and if they do that they will get so far
ahead of and use that power against
everybody else that now everybody else
has to race to do that thing and you get
a race to the cliff so an arms race is a
classic example right we really don't
want a world with AI weapons it's a much
less good world with AI weapons but we
would have to ensure that nobody makes
them we'd have to make an agreement
where if anyone doesn't join the
agreement and says no we're gonna make
the AI whip and then everybody has to
not only make them but also make the
countermeasures and
race to make them faster mm-hm and even
if we make the agreement we're pretty
sure the other guy is secretly defecting
on the agreement in the basement so we
make the agreement while secretly
defecting on it in the basement while
spying on them and trying to confuse
their spies and it's like how the
do we get out of that and the same is
true the tragedy of the Commons if I
figure out how to externalize some of my
cost and so my margins go up all of my
competitors have to figure out how to
externalize some cost or we have to try
and figure out how to make some law to
bind it but it's very hard to make laws
to bind these things and so the same is
true with ethical issues right if I am
perfectly ethical I am going to lose in
politics because I won't be able to get
anybody to support me whatever so I make
certain kinds of compromises and so one
thing I would look at is if we want to
look at catastrophic risk writ large we
can look at multipolar traps drive as a
general game theoretic phenomena driving
lots of different ways
the catastrophic risk can happen so
another thing game B has to do is solve
multipolar traps so in other words look
at the universal class of such things
rather than begin then getting bewitched
by any particular instance correct but
we have to solve for the class of
multipolar traps or at large because
it's not just we don't want an arms race
on AI weapons we also don't want an arms
race on bioweapons or a nanotech way I
think it's well phrased does it buy us
anything does it buy oh sorry I want to
be clear not bias be IAS but by bu y us
does it buy us anything in the sense of
does that avoid catastrophic risk by
itself really do formulating decided to
work over the class yeah of really
dangerous to use your language
multipolar traps does that actually
point us to some game theoretic thing
that all all of our friends who did the
game theory of the Cold War might have
missed I'm not aware of any major game
theoretic advance in what you're calling
multi polar traps it's not a major game
theoretic advance what we're
that we that that phenomena creates a
lot of different race to the bottom type
scenarios but with exponentially more
power the race to the bottoms are much
deeper bottoms so in the past we've had
boom and bust cycles associated with
those right right and so everybody
starts doing the pollution thing until
you get a bus that's associated which
creates some new market advantage to
clean the pollution up at a certain
point because people are willing to pay
for that and so you'll get these kind of
boom and bust cycles that's kind of the
best that a market can give you with
regard to multipolar traps but the level
of bust that we get with exponential
technologies and this many people
basically is unviable and so we've never
figured out how to solve for that class
and I'm saying that that's one of the
things you're asking is there a game B
that I believe in it would have to solve
for a number of things it would have to
actually remove rival risk dynamics
which is which would solve for
multipolar traps because multipolar
traps are a situation where the
well-being of each agent can be
optimized independently of and even at
the expense of the other agents in the
commons as long as that's the case we
have an incentive to do up stuff
with increasing power that is one way of
thinking about an underlying generator
of all the catastrophic risks we loss
let's assume that I buy in because quite
honestly this has been always been my
problem with game B is that I look at
the I look at the game theory and I look
at our history in terms of what has
brought us to this this point and I
would say that if you believe any
version of the theory of natural and
sexual selection you would have to say
that we are the product of an arms race
and the idea that we would be wise
enough to stop the arms race when I
I can hear in my mind's ear all these
people saying WOW Chicken Little is at
it again
everything's great you know Steven
Pinker tells us that we were in a much
more peaceful world we won the Cold War
what are you guys going on about I mean
things are a little bit screwy in
politic
and suddenly it's all gloom and doom i I
just I hear that voice and then I hear
this other voice which is this optimism
about maybe we could become wise maybe
we could become the people wise enough
to have synthetic biology and nuclear
weapons an instant communication and
data warfare and all these things and
survive and thrive and I don't see how
help me out where is the hope here I I
think the you and I probably don't need
to talk about this much but that what I
would call a naive tech no optimism is
bananas cherry-picking data is easy from
a big data set well and the great
negative externality is potential
violence as long as you don't see
potential violence as having increased
now you might I then you don't see the
problem
one argument you could make is that
sub-lethal technology has increased our
ability to shoot beanbags at protesters
means that you don't actually have to
kill protesters you know that there
there are some weird arguments but what
you never lost the ability to kill them
he just may have not outfitted riot
police with lethal technology in their
first and the first wave of things that
you send against an unruly crowd and the
most awesome thing about the current
system is we don't even have to deal
with protesters with tear gas or
beanbags or whatever mostly because
mostly addiction and student debt and
information overwhelm and those things
deal with the people adequately so they
they don't actually understand enough or
care enough or have the capacity to
organize very meaningfully we just
legalize weed and make porn free and
everyone's demotivated those are a
couple examples okay
I think we need to talk about sound like
a good thing like me maybe it's keeping
this no we're going critical no no I'm
saying that every dominant system has an
intrinsic propensity to figure out how
to stay being the dominant system which
means that it has a intrinsic propensity
to get better at being able to deal with
dissent and we can look at different
kinds of conflicts there you and Peter
we're talking about Girardi and conflict
we can look at this as kind of a Marxist
class type conflict but I think it's
it's deeper than that the system that is
self-perpetuating is inanimate the
system which is self-perpetuating is not
itself animate or sentient but it is
autopoietic but it is autopoietic and
this is the fascinating thing to get is
it's like let's take let's take Nick
Bostrom's paperclip Maximizer as an
analogy so I know you know this but for
the people who don't when looking at
concerning AI risk scenarios one of them
is this you know kind of funny idea of a
paperclip Maximizer paperclip is
representative of any widget so make an
AI that basically can do two things it
can optimize the production of something
here a paperclip and so it can use its
intelligence to do that so it can make
more efficient supply chains and
whatever and it can use its intelligence
to increase its own intelligence so
you'll get a exponential curve on
intelligence which also then means an
exponential curve on its capacity to
optimize whatever narrow metric its
optimizing and so of course after it
just makes increases in efficiency which
are awesome then it starts making so
many paper clips that it needs new
substrate to make paperclips out of and
it eventually turns the whole world into
paperclips because it can it can grow
its intelligence to out-compete
whoever's competing for those paperclips
faster than they can that's a very short
version of it you're going to say
something well just
I guess what I find very bizarre about
all of this is that I live in multiple
social worlds and intellectual worlds
and in some of my worlds this stuff
strikes people as loopy oh here comes
the stuff about the AGI that the robots
are gonna kill us all and in some other
portion of my world it's like well
clearly we're on the verge of AGI and
that's going to be the existential risk
and this is in part to go back to your
original point and something that you
and I share a failure a catastrophic
failure of communal sense making right
so what I've claimed is is that the
revolution that we're in is is based
around the idea that we don't have what
I've called semi reliable communal sense
making we can't all agree now even if
it's slightly wrong or maybe even deeply
wrong as to what it is that we're seeing
where we are in human history what our
issues are and so the first part of this
decision tree that goes really wrong is
that a lot of people think that we're in
great shape okay so this is I I'm
actually gonna come back to the
paperclip Maximizer because it explains
why we don't have communal sense making
if instead of thinking about an
artificial intelligence they can
increase its capacity while optimizing
something we think of a collective
intelligence that can some way that
humans are processing information
together in a group a market is a kind
of collective intelligence right the
whole idea of what the invisible hand of
the market that the market will figure
out what stuff people really want it's
expressed as demand and then which
version of the various supplies is best
that I would say it's an intelligence
it's not a central intelligence but the
idea is that there is kind of an
emergent intelligent is an emergent
property of this thing and you know it
computes things like prices and
allocations and if that's what you mean
by intelligence that I oh yeah so it's
it is a bottom-up coordination system
that does end up having new information
emerges
the result of the bottom-up coordination
okay and I can take a market as a as
kind of at the sender I can take
capitalism at the center of the more
general class of what I would call rival
risk dynamics as a whole as a kind of
collective intelligence because the
thing that wins at the game of rivalry
gets selected for and so there is this
kind of learning of how to get better at
rival risk games learning across the
system as a whole which which things win
in or which things keep more people
believing the thing which keep people
from at ridding out of the thing like
that that makes sense yes and so I would
say that we have if we just take the
capitalism part capitalism is a paper
clip Maximizer that is converting the
natural world and human resources into
capital while getting better at doing so
so it goes from barter to currency to
fiat currency to fractional reserve
process to complex financial instruments
to high-speed trading on those those are
like the increase in its capacity to do
that but specifically now it is a
incentive for all the humans to do
certain things
so if leaving the whale alive in the
ocean confers no economic advantage on
me but killing it and selling it as meat
is a million dollars of economic
advantage and if I don't kill it the a
whale still won't be alive because
somebody else is gonna kill it anyways
and then that they might actually even
use that economic power against me now
I've got I have an incentive system that
is encouraging all the humans to behave
in certain kinds of ways and now not
only do we need to kill the whales we
need to race at getting better to do it
and making better militaries and
extracting all the resources and so I
see this as a kind of so if I'm
understanding where you're headed what
you're saying is is that the market is
kind of a precursor to an AGI it is a
collective intelligence that is
eventually self terminating in the same
way that a cancer is right the cancer
cells are self-replicating and they're
growing
to the normal cells but they end up
killing the host which kills themselves
and so the the reason I'm bringing this
up in terms of collective sense making
is those who do the will of capitalism
like those who do the will of the
paperclip Maximizer Moloch's or on
whatever kind of analogy we want to use
here those who do well at the game of
power get more power and then they use
that legislative power media power
capital power to make systems that to
modify the systems in ways that help
them more right those who oppose the
system of power also oppose those who
are doing well at it so even though the
system is inanimate the people who are
doing well at it or animate so then they
take those people out which is we see
how Martin Luther King and Gandhi and
Jesus and etc died people who actually
opposed the system of power right and so
you end up having a system that is
selecting for or is conferring more
power to those who are good at getting
more power which ends up meaning who are
selecting for conferring power to
sociopathy yeah I I don't find this part
of the argument well maybe I'm just
stuck somewhere doing okay let me be I
mean I think I'm on your side so I want
to help make a different part of this
case I think a lot of this comes down to
magical thinking because of the non use
of nuclear weapons against humans since
1945 I think that one thing if 9/11 had
been a nuclear attack rather than a
weird conventional attack we would know
where we were in human history and by
virtue of our luck and our luck alone we
are completely confused as to how
perilous the present moment is because
our luck has been amazing and if you
believe surprising yeah if you believe
that somehow it can't be luck because
it's this good then you believe that
there's some unknown principle keeping
us safe and that you don't know what the
name of that principle
maybe it's human engine in ingenuity
maybe it's some sort of secret
collective that keeps the world sensible
maybe it's that markets have tied us all
together I don't know what your story is
yeah but whatever your story is it's
wrong and it's it's obviously wrong
right the the idea that we didn't have
anything like 9/11 and then we had a
sudden 9/11 kind of attack is itself
paradigm attic that these things with
which you have no data familiarity I
mean look there was no suicide bombing
in the modern world before the 1980s and
I think this is the point is that it's
generally more advantageous within a
market to believe that markets are good
in the world as healthy and things are
awesome
I'll usually do better in academia if I
say academia is good right which is a
point that you make if I really
criticize it heavily I'm gonna get less
tense this is Peter's point more than my
point okay yeah I will usually do better
in markets if I say they're awesome and
do better in a corporation if I say it's
awesome and so there is kind of an
incentive for optimism about the
dominant system if I want to do well in
the dominant system and if I have
critiques of the dominant system I'm
usually going to do less well in it
which means less power will get
conferred to those ideas and so there's
kind of a mimetic selection right like
the memes that that do well end up being
the memes that propagate but do well
with an ax current system well look this
is why I've called for a return to
above-ground nuclear testing because my
belief is is that we you laugh but I'm
not kidding yeah I mean if we don't get
our amygdalas really engaged with where
we are this magical thinking which by
the way I suffer from this magical thing
I'm not it's not something I'm claiming
everyone else has I have the idea that
nothing too bad can can come that you
know I always asked this weird question
which is how many foreign nuclear
devices are currently on US soil people
always think about the nukes will have
to come through an ICBM I'm not at all
convinced that that would have to be
true people just don't think about these
things because
we've been in such a rare period of time
that these things haven't like everybody
who's talked in these terms
sort of to me like there's a part of me
that sounds like okay well that's the
kind of a conversation you have on on a
dorm floor during a bull session like
grown-ups realize that something is
keeping the world together which is
funny right because it's basically
saying grown-ups have bought into
magical thinking exactly yeah and so by
the way a lot of the people that I think
of as being the smartest most
interesting people have not bought into
this magical thinking what has happened
is is that those people have been pushed
out of the institutions that form this
sort of weird conversation that I refer
to as the gated institutional narrative
and the depopulation of dissenters like
really serious dissenters from inside
the institutional complex is one of the
defining features of our age to me but
something that you can't get any
commentary on because the commentary
you're really looking for is is that
conversation so what I just try to do is
to show people that no matter what you
do the gated institutional narrative
cannot look at certain very basic facts
right so you get a very dangerous kind
of groupthink there and even if someone
disagrees with it they have a lot more
incentive to not publicly disagree with
it within that group think only of those
people I mean this is why we're doing
the portal podcast which is let's be
honest this is pirate radio yeah and I
don't know why it hasn't been shut down
at the moment the best thing that the
gated institutional conversation has
going for it is that all of these
interesting people are simply humans and
you can destroy any human reputationally
and so the cheapest thing to do is not
to kill anybody right but just as
somebody starts to accumulate mindshare
the gated institutional narrative goes
into into hyperdrive and it just starts
pumping out
fear uncertainty in doubt which is the
you know Fudd is the major tool for
destroying an individual's ability to
communicate reality yeah
something I think about is the people
who went through what happened in Syria
recently or say collapse in Libya or
wherever where you had an actual pretty
developed nation that didn't also expect
that it was going to go through war and
collapse and then it did I bet that if
we talk to those people they would have
a very different intuition for the state
of the fragility here because they
actually have first-person experience
it's something that seemed really stable
and like it wasn't going to collapse
actually did and most of us haven't
actually been through anything like a
collapse in our life and we don't have a
good intuition for things that are only
in history books and so this is a place
where our intuition by itself like our
intuition is informed by our experience
but our experience is very short right
and if we study past civilizations one
of the things we know and you know we
can read Tainter in the collapse of
complex societies or you know other kind
of good insights on how civilizational
collapse works but none of the previous
civilizations are still here like that's
that's one of the important things to
get is that they go through a life cycle
and that they mostly collapse for
self-induced reasons and that even if
someone else overtook them oftentimes
the group that overtook them was smaller
than rivals that they had fended off
previously because they had already
started going through institutional
collapse or civilizational collapse and
if we look across all of them there are
some things we can generalize about what
leads to civilizational collapse but I
think the difference now versus any of
those other times is that due to
globalization yeah in some ways the US
and China are different civilizations
but both of them would fail without each
other currently and like we don't make
our own computational substrate we don't
make our own lots of things right like
they don't do their own fundamental well
but the size of the hope of the but the
architects of many of these systems
believed that a kind of eakin
Sonic mutually assured destruction yeah
it was the best way of producing hang
that's been true you well so I was gonna
bring up the case of Europe so one of
the arguments for the European
experiment is that you Europe is
actually arguably the world's most
dangerous region people are very
competent and their long-standing
rivalries and hatreds and you had some
desire to create something that seems
impossible which is a United States of
Europe and nobody was gonna sign up for
that so how do you do that while you
back you back them into a financial
union without political Union you give
them their ability the ability to issue
their own debt but not an ability to
print it their currencies and then you
wait for the collapse to come and then
your hope in this storyline anyway you
create a Federation which becomes a
political Federation the United States
of Europe is created because of a
sovereign debt crisis and we sort of
went through that which I believe was it
was was sort of a sought after outcome
which is maybe hopefully people will
print their own their own debt and
they'll issue debt and they won't be
able to print their own currencies in
order to inflate their way out of it
ergo something positive will have to
happen that seems to me to be also a
recipe for disaster and that the
architects of these plans seemingly died
and everybody's on autopilot not
understanding you know I've seen this in
the in terms of certain US policies
where people create a policy for reasons
that nobody's really understanding and a
short time later nobody even knows why
the policy was created the real reason
and to begin with do you see that this
kind of a world I think that's actually
one of the meaningful dynamics in
institutional decay and in
civilizational decay is that a new
civilization is formed coming out
coming out of a war or after a migration
or through a famine or after like some
really developing yeah and to really be
able to build something new took real
capacities what you would call the
contact with the unforgiving right like
real empirical capacities and just
loaded my lingo sir a bit yeah and I
think that's really good
lingo because like the I can't I can't
lie to physics and have it reward me for
it right like either I can grow corn or
I can't grow corn either I can win it a
war or I can't but there's a real
situation and so oftentimes when we go
from non more time where the generals
are politicians to war time where the
politician generals who maybe suck at
war start losing battles and we cycle
through looking for ones who are good at
it then we get some who are actually
good at war those difficult situations
select for real empirical capacity but
when you don't have those difficult
situations then you're actually
selecting for who can do politics best
which means convince everyone of
something whether it's true or not well
this is what I call sharp Minds versus
sharp elbows yeah and so you have the
people who are at the beginning of
figuring out how to do some new
civilization and those people had some
capacity to be in direct contact with
reality and figure stuff out and then
oftentimes what they pass on is the
stuff they figured out but not the
psychology in them and the capacities to
figure stuff out so the generator
function of the civilizational models
lost and so now we start getting copying
errors and people are hopefully trying
to at least copy it earnestly so now
we've got a constitution or a set of law
or a set of market practices or whatever
it is but we don't really understand how
we generated that effective thing and so
that also means that as the environment
changes we won't be able to adapt it
adequately and that also means that
we're not going to know how to deal with
failures of it so then some people
recognizing that start realizing that
they can do better by defecting on the
system and kind of preying on it then by
participating with the system and so and
this is what we
think of as corruption right where they
can start maximizing their own bonus
structure or do it back in the or
whatever and so long as it's adequately
hidden they can get away with it and now
that collapses the civilization even
further so it goes from loss of
generator function to copying errors to
incentive for internal defection and
disinformation and you know like I think
that every civilization has faced this a
loss of intergenerational knowledge
transfer because it's not just the
knowledge it's the generative function
of how Lahti good it's also the case
that real knowledge I think has become
too dangerous to transmit and the real
knowledge doesn't know what the social
norms are and you know certainly the
biological world is so disturbing I mean
there's no corner of the biological
world since you can look at where and
not come away thinking wow that's
incredibly destroyed and what we're
seeing right now a situation in which we
can't cope with any discussion of
biology every single attempt to have a
real biological discussion given all of
the social issues that it would bring up
immediately ends in madness
I've just seen no ability to talk real
biology in public and so this is the
earliest place where I can see here's a
subject of science that actually can't
be discussed I don't have anything in
particular in mind
there's just you know like you know Bob
Trevor's work on parent-child conflict
if we have a beautiful story about how
mothers would do anything for their
children and somebody comes along and
says no it's actually a struggle where
mothers want to hold on to their
resources because they're gonna have
many children and the child attempts to
gain as much resource as possible
without regard for the mother
that's so against the Hallmark card
version of motherhood for Mother's Day
that we can't have a discussion about
parent-child conflict in biology it's
not that that one isn't about gender
it's not about race it's not about you
know power dynamics it's about it just
immediately runs into one of our
cherished nonsensical points of
or is it the market is self-correcting
the market is always self-correcting and
knows best that the leading thinkers are
all sitting in institutional chairs that
every previous civilization was the
Hobbesian bias brutish nasty short
dreadful lives and that everything is
awesome just in the last little bit
because of this system so don't
criticize the system eventually so this
is the the weird thing that I'm I'm
finding is that you can't start
interesting conversations not only about
the pessimism of the impending collapse
if we keep this up but about the
optimism about well what might we do
differently like we can't get energized
to actually use this period of time to
do something novel in an interesting and
hopefully a so think about this the you
know the definition of infidel for kind
of a jihadist ideology is anybody that's
not supporting the jihadist ideology the
definition of which to the Crusaders was
kind of a similar thing right the I have
a friend who went looked at a bunch of
the intelligence agency documents in
Yugoslavia and some of the Baltic
nations that had been Declassified after
the USSR collapse specifically regarding
how the intelligence agencies influenced
the definition of psychiatry and their
equivalent of the DSM and so there was
something like their definition of
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for
psychology which tells you when somebody
is mentally has a personality disorder
neuroses you remember the previous
definition of female mania during the
Victorian period right which basically
translated to she had a sex drive and so
that was like a mental illness and but
so they their definition of something
that translated to schizophrenia the
first symptom was had negative feelings
about the state and the second symptoms
might take a while to show up and so
what I think happens is that the
dominant system ends up eating
psychology and saying that the
psychology that supports the dominant
system is healthy psychology and
anything that is dissenting - it's not
healthy it ends up beating spirituality
and virtue and ethics and academia and
whatever to basically say the the
behaviors that support the system
are good so the thinking that supports
those behaviors is good and anything
that's dissenting is bad and like it's
so easy to see it in the Crusades or in
jihadism or even in Victorian time
period it's just very hard for us to see
it about ourselves now but I think
that's actually like one of these
fundamental things in terms of you're
saying like why don't we have group
sense-making is because you have us you
have a self-perpetuating system that
includes the self perpetuation of the
memes that support the system I
understand well look I also have I ask
it not because I have no ideas why we
don't have communal sense making what
I'm confused by is why we are not more
successful people in our group and I
mean this in a relatively large and
inclusive sense because you and I come
from different corners of this large
collection of people I think people are
relatively well-spoken some of them have
fancy degrees some of them have made
money some of them have become
relatively well known for their their
thinking and yet that institutional
conversation I mean I always liken it a
bit to the difference between wrestling
and professional wrestling where in the
institutional conversation you need to
know what's going to happen ahead of
schedule so the you can know whether
you're going to have that part of the
conversation or not or whether it's
going to be that the private
conversation that we can't talk about
versus the public in a conversation in
this concept I've called split level
argument other people have called
motte-and-bailey style tactics where you
have some version of the argument that
you can make in public and then you have
some other argument that you really have
to is governing why you're saying and
doing what you're doing all of these
things lead to this very unhealthy
situation whereby there is no communal
sense making there is a gated
institutional narrative it seems to be
decaying progressively year by year
nobody's suddenly coming up to me and
saying wow I think CNN and Fox are doing
a great job this
where's the hope where does this get fun
and when did we get a chance to to find
a portal to a better world as you see
most likely yeah well oh I want to start
by saying I think this is important and
I think that you doing this as a portal
to a better world where you are
supporting earnest thinking that is
outside of institutional context and
maybe heterodox but at least earnest and
seeking to be well grounded and the fact
that people are interested in it I think
is really important when we come back to
the difference between personal
incentive and collective incentive right
you say why aren't we more successful
obviously it's like okay so what is the
incentive for someone to agree with us
that for the most part expressing these
things would make them do less well at
politics and their job and maybe even
their social club and maybe even be part
of the in-group that they're part of
whether it's the left or the right or
the whatever it is because then they
would be saying things that there's
almost no in-group that they would be
aligned with or very very small and so
you still end up having that there's
more selective pressure for the
individuals to continue to be part of
institutions even an institutional
thoughts also doesn't make sense here's
the part that doesn't make sense
and very kind of you to say what you
just said let's imagine that you have
perfect SAT scores you kept your nose
clean your whole life you've gone to
Harvard and Yale you've got a position
where you're commenting as a professor
with a column in a major publication if
that person for example calls me all
right you know or I don't know I mean
like I have a Jewish last name I voted
for Bernie there's some point where that
person's self-esteem I would imagine
they would be so embarrassed to put
their life's
compliments at risk by just being
obviously stupidly wrong like that they
just there's there seems to be no bottom
at the moment okay so this is this is
important about obviously stupidly wrong
I understand obviously stupidly wrong
when your ability to demonstrate your
power is to go out in the public square
and say the dumbest most ridiculous most
obviously incorrect thing you can think
of and nobody says a word yeah well one
of the things I find interesting is you
know if we ask a question like even
what's actually causing coral die-off
how much of it is temperature versus pH
versus nitrogen messing up the
phosphorous cycle versus trophic
cascades right how long do we have
before the coral die-off what are the
consequences of that you know like
really important questions right or what
are the actual what really happened in
North Korea like why there was such a
change just recently and what are the
actual tactical nuclear capabilities
that they have or or how much leakage
actually occurred at Fukushima or like
any of these things nobody knows
and you'll hear different narratives and
you'll hear kind of equally compelling
disagreeable narratives on those yeah
and almost no one has the time or the
will or the epistemic capacity to really
figure that out so one point is the
sense making is actually hard you have a
situation in which a lot of these things
are complex enough and there's so much
disinformation that when people try to
actually figure it out they just get a
they get a information overwhelm and
then it's very hard for them to continue
so when you're saying like obviously
stupid well there aren't there's a lot
of places where people can hold a train
of thought that seems cogent enough even
if it's in direct opposition with
another cogent train of thought and like
just the plausible deniability that it
might be one of the true ones since
nobody can really sense make seems to be
enough and so this is one of the really
tricky things is in a world where
if I have the incentive to dis inform ya
at various different levels right and
then I have exponential information tech
so I can do exponential disinformation
now this is when I say that the system
is inanimate I any give this example
everybody who's seen Tristan Harris's
stuff will know this but if we think
about disinformation via the nature son
Harris is mutual colleague he heads a
movement called time well-spent and he's
trying to show you that your attention
has been effectively weaponized against
you where the big tech platforms are
figuring out how to keep your eyeballs
on their system to your detriment right
Center for humane technology you can see
his stuff but like I think I think a lot
of people know that news stations as
for-profit companies have to make money
right and they make money by monetizing
attention and basically they they sell
advertising and the advertisers pay more
the more people who are watching for
more total minutes so the incentive of
the news station is to make stuff that
is both inflaming and scary and
entertaining and whatever it will engage
people to spend a lot of time watching
in and to not say things it would not be
to the advantage of the advertisers that
can afford to pay for them right so they
have like they have an incentive to not
share really complex nuanced things that
will have most people click off but to
share things if I see I don't I really
don't let me give you an argument one of
the things that I say that I think
people find interesting is is that I
believe the National Academy of Sciences
in the National Science Foundation
effectively conspired against American
scientists and engineers on behalf of
scientific and engineering employers
that's a fascinating story I shout it in
the public square now you know I've been
asked four times to the National Academy
of Sciences to discuss this so they are
certainly taking this quite seriously
I've talked to the actual people who are
involved with this it is amazingly
interesting you could sell clicks you
think you could just get advertisers to
buy for the clicks
the story nobody's gonna run the story
nobody has run the story in I don't know
more than 20 years it's sitting there on
servers I don't believe that this is all
being driven by profit I believe that
there is some force that we don't
understand that keeps the gated
institutional narrative gated yes I
think profit is one part of it that's
why I say we have to think of profit as
one aspect of kind of power or rival
risk dynamic more largely because it's I
think government or academia or
religious or cultural groups or profit
can all influence the nature of
narrative and information I think
there's an economy of shame and terror
say more about that I believe that the
real reason that this works the way it
does is we have not even gotten to a
very basic point where it is considered
acceptable to say I want immigration
restricted now I point this out because
I think is very funny most people who
want immigration restricted enjoy food
from other cultures they they have
friends who come from other places they
enjoy travel there's nothing xenophobic
about them in general there is zina
philic yeah and the idea that you can be
both as inna philic fascinated and
interested in the world's cultures and
want immigration to your country
restricted and that this is the generic
position that the average person holds
this position is a story that appears
nowhere so nobody has an idea that zina
philic restriction lists might be a
plurality or a majority in the country
because there is a rule that says anyone
who calls for a restriction of
immigration must be tarred as a
xenophobe right and I think it's time to
double dog dare the people who are
keeping this level of discipline they
say why can't why is it it impossible to
be a zina philic restriction Asst
what I think is is that the economy of
shame is such that whoever acts first to
make this point is in such danger for
their livelihood their reputation that
they are going to be tarred and
feathered and why not one of the things
that I'm trying to show people is is
that you can you can make these points
now I can't do this on CNN but I can do
this on pirate radio this is basically
audio samizdat it to take the Russian
underground mimeograph movement as as a
template we can say things here but
there's only a matter of time before the
starts to become problematic to the
institutional structure and it responds
by debiting my account
oh well that that's that all right guy
you know he seems disgruntled or you
know he seems a gloomy and out of touch
and then the fear uncertainty and doubt
campaign starts and that's what is
actually keeping everybody in line it's
not that there isn't money to be made
there's tons of money to be made
what what's happened is is that it's
been too easy to pick off the initial
adopters I agree and I'm curious what
your explanation of how that phenomena
emerged oh that's a really so let's
really get into it we did have a
dissension suppression unit inside of
the FBI which was called COINTELPRO and
it tried to induce Martin Luther King
jr. to suicide through a letter from
Sullivan who was I think number one or
number two maybe under Hoover this thing
lived inside of the FBI it probably
tried to tell John Lennon that he was
traitorous it tried to humiliate Jean
Seberg who is a Black Panther supporter
by planting false information inside of
mainstream media
Newsweek in the Los Angeles Times it
tried to get la cosa nostra to kill Dick
Gregory the famous comedian and black
civil rights leader so we did have a
dirty tricks unit inside of the United
States that needs to be known broadly
which was pretty thoroughly investigated
in the mid-1970s and once we saw that we
were engaged in his dirty tricks against
our own people we were kind of shocked
and flipped out and the economy wasn't
in great shape and then Ronald Reagan
came riding in and I think he pardoned
mark felt who had been the head of
COINTELPRO after Hoover but he was also
deep throat and so you had this very
strange situation that we got this
reboot during the Reagan years where we
went back to some sort of more
traditional more patriotic imagined
version of our country and my belief is
that in part when Bill Clinton decided
that he couldn't take yet another loss
to the Republican Party and was gonna
start experimenting with republicanism
inside of the Democratic Party by that
point we had two parties that more or
less were two flavors of the same thing
I refer to that collective as the
looting party in the looting party the
neoliberal is the neoconservatives
sort of intergenerational warfare within
the country in the US and my take on it
is that the common ideology is that
profit had to be found abroad and so you
had to loosen the bonds to your fellow
citizens and that's where all of this
kind of the market always knows best
we need to offshore and downsize and
securitize and what I've called the new
gimmick economy so that right now we're
waking up from the new gimmick economy
and having never lived in anything
really authentic unless we're quite old
so my belief is is that during that
period of time there was very Swift
retribution for anyone who dissented
famously a prominent trade theorist who
was talking about the benefits of
restriction of trade restrictions for
infant industries let's say apparently
got a call from one of the people high
up in the field say oh you seem to be a
very bright young man it would be a
shame if anything happened to your
career and so this kind of idea
suppression is the the hallmark well it
is what I think these two generations
the baby boomers and the Silent
Generation may become best known for in
the future that this was a period in
which new corrective ideas had to be
suppressed because of the fragility of
the system we saw the fragility breakout
in 2008 we saw have vulnerable we were
in 2001 and we see that the the whole
sense making apparatus is breaking down
from the Trump election so these have
been the three moments when the gated
institutional narrative has broken
because it just got overwhelmed by
events but other than that the key was
making sure that people like you or like
me or like Peter are not mainstream the
cost of listening to us has to be driven
to astronomical levels so we have to we
have to look wild-eyed we have to you
know they can't call me uneducated if I
have a Harvard ph.d which is one of the
funny parts of the system but the idea
is that you have to say well you know
maybe he used to be smart but he's gone
fringe so the the social cost and
similar
it's amazing how effective such small
amounts of that can be well it's also
just funny I mean it just there's so
many hours of audio of us and I was just
astounded for example with a number of
people who would try to portray let's
say my brother as right-wing I mean from
my perspective
can you imagine making that decision
that you can't if a guy as far left as
Brett and you're gonna spend your
credibility pretending that he's like
allied with the Nazis
I just died it doesn't even make sense
to me because it's it's simply to me a
way to incinerate your credibility and
yet the way the system works is you
incinerate people's viability its
economic warfare that if your reputation
is damaged you can't be trusted
you know you and and that's how that's
how this this enforcement is work so you
ask me the question how does it work to
keep this in line it's to trivially easy
to destroy individuals and my question
has always been is there a program which
I have tentatively called
no living heroes and if you've heard
this riff before Charles Lindbergh who
was not a great human being almost kept
the u.s. out of World War two he said
why is this why is this America's
problem and if you think about it he had
self minted credibility in that he got
into a plane and he flew it over an
ocean solo and became a hero and that
level of visibility allowed him to
compete with the state okay I think that
there was a program after Lindbergh that
said individuals should not be able to
amass sufficient mindshare to affect the
course of government policy and that
this is a question in my mind is there a
program that got started that said we're
gonna wait and see if anything starts to
bubble up that seems to have integrity
it seems that mindshare it seems to be
opposed to our policies and if and when
we find such a thing it has to be
redirected co-opted destroyed
reputationally or made ineffectual and
the the phrase that I really appreciated
that was used about Jean Seberg who was
you know one of Hollywood's great
leading ladies at the time
was we have to cheapen her image yeah
this is the federal government talking
about cheapening the image of a
Hollywood star because she was
interested in in radical black politics
sorry Kendra but now China reminds me
when you were saying if when we look at
biology it's disturbing when we look at
history too and we realized that those
people that did the Crusades were
genetically identical to us and we think
about the kind of civilized way that we
want to think of ourselves that we
wouldn't do something like have a
government try and discredit someone but
then we look at just how we have behaved
as people throughout most of history and
it's been like it's been pretty
draconian through most of it and I think
we're at a time where having it more
hidden has been useful but that doesn't
mean that it hasn't still been happening
well it's very interesting to me is we
go from we have these two phases the
first phase is like you think people are
still doing that you have an overactive
imagination then when it's discovered I
say what you think that governments
don't do this they've always done this
and I've always watched as people get
their cognitive dissonance to zero using
two totally different mental strategies
do you find us of course yeah all right
Daniel assuming that we are in some
sense breaking out of this narrative
that's been imposed institutionally and
you're starting to be able to hear new
voices is there an opportunity in some
way to start hacking our way into a less
rival risk well let me try it again
sorry for getting a little bit of gas I
also had a little bit of guest
all right Danno so if we agree that
there is something a little bit bizarre
about the extent to which there's been
discipline in this gated institutional
narrative and it's been hard to get kind
of a different message out to people
that they need to start exploring new
systems of organization may be beyond
market democracy who knows what what are
the most hopeful systems that we
currently have to use they can be used
to build even better systems and how do
we get that message out where do you see
the hope in trying to confront the real
problems we face to find and exit into
our our next stage of human development
so we've been talking about where there
is incentive for disinformation or
information suppression or narrative
suppression the the last chunk of things
you were sharing regarding shames kind
of a narrative warfare tool so a way I
think of it and say there was a group
that seemed like it didn't have power of
one kind then it tries to find power of
some other kind so reconfiguring in
groups competing with whatever tools
they can against out groups but imagine
if we could create a situation where
there was no incentive for
disinformation I'll talk about in a
moment how I think we could do that and
not just no incentive for disinformation
but also no incentive for information
withholding and something pretty unique
about humans is how good we are being
able to add intention to signal lie but
all the subtle versions right which is
most of the signal that is coming to me
is just bouncing off of stuff and
reflecting and doesn't have that much
disinformation in it and obviously
animals have kin of camouflage and
strategies like that but every time
we're communicating we are usually
communicating towards some intention
that we have and so I want you to think
certain things were you thinking those
things I think will advantage me but
then to the extent that you take what
saying as adequately informing you like
accurately informing you about reality I
not be right like there's a discrepancy
between why I'm communicating to you and
what would be maximum benefit to you so
and even if we're not doing spin and
Russell conjugation disinformation even
if it's just i pianned trade secrets and
information withholding this lowers our
coordination capacity to do interesting
things tremendously and then there's so
much coordination cost that goes into
the competition so we say well let's
imagine and we I think we can say up to
a tribal scale people did could do I'm
not saying they always did I don't wanna
be romantic people could do a better job
of accurate information sharing because
there was less incentive to dis inform
each other inside of a tribe because it
would probably get powned out and we
actually depended on each other pretty
significantly but the Dunbar limit seems
to be a pretty hard limit on that kind
of information check do you mean this
supposed Dunbar number that is the limit
of our ancestral mind or group to track
the number of interactions we have so
maybe maybe I can keep track of 200 or
300 people yeah not much more yeah
whether whether it's a hundred and fifty
or 50 or 200 or whatever it is and you
know I think we've attributed this to
different things why tribes never got
beyond a certain scale within a certain
kind of organization and if they would
start to they would cleave and then if
they were going to get larger they had
to have a different kind of organization
I think how one thing that we commonly
think about is that kind of a limit of
care and tracking right up to that
number up to 150 people or whatever I
can actually know everybody pretty well
they can all know me and if I were to
hurt anybody I'm hurting the people that
I've known for my whole life so
something like universal interest of
that group or almost like a communist
idea makes sense if there's no anonymous
people and there's no very far spaces
where I can externalize harm I basically
can't externalize harm in the social
Commons when I know everybody
I also probably can't lie and have that
be advantageous I think there's another
thing which is there's a communication
protocol that anyone who has information
about something within that setting can
inform a choice
where that information would be relevant
that the tribe would be making because
they can actually communicate with
everybody fairly easily and if there's a
really big choice to make everybody can
sit around a tribal circle and actually
be able to say something about it and as
you get larger you just can't do that
and I think there's a strong cleaving
basis for not wanting to be part of a
group that would make decisions that
I'll be subjected to that I don't get
any saying unless it's really important
to do that like we're gonna have there's
a situation where tribal warfare is
starting to occur more often and so
having a larger group is really
important or you know some something
like that in which case the bonding
energy exceeds the cleaving energy but
let's say that we could actually have a
situation where we had incentive to
share
- not this inform and to share accurate
information with each other and it could
scale beyond a dunbar size I so now we
have something where we don't have
fractal disinformation inside of a
company we don't have people competing
for cancer cures that aren't sharing
information with each other I think that
system would out-compete all the systems
that we've had in terms of innovation
and in terms of resource utilization
resource per capita utilization so much
that if we could do such a thing had
become the new attractive Basin to which
civilizations would want to flow and I
think the limit of Dunbar dynamics were
communication protocols and I think we
do have technological capacity and I'm
be I mean both social technologies and
physical technologies to develop systems
and and so like this is kind of at the
heart of it to develop systems where
there was more incentive to share honest
information and obviously this is a
example of anti rivalries where I had my
well being in your well-being and
wellbeing of the Commons more tightly
coupled to each other yeah that's the
first part of it okay so try to figure
out how to get very large-scale human
collectives to behave like small scale
human collectives well it's yeah if I
think about two groups of people that
sounds to me like TripAdvisor where I to
some country I've never been to and I'm
never going back again and there's some
sort of reputational cost that a hotel
would have had if it had gamed their
guests so it becomes a bad idea to game
your guests because you have a
fractional relationship with the world
in some sense where somebody has left a
review it says but you know be careful
they try to upsell you on the Wi-Fi and
it's a scam and here's how to look out
for it and suddenly you have got a
problem if you're a dishonest actor
because there is this sort of
reputational game that is
technologically enabled yeah so I think
this is why people like blockchain is
the idea of an uncorruptible ledger is
that this information and information
withholding or would be really benefit
beneficial to the public and any kind of
bad acting does less well with good
accounting systems I have to be able to
kind of corrupt the accounting in some
way to be able to have it be
advantageous and so can we make can we
make systems that make the accounting
much better as part of it but it's not
the whole basis because then of course
you still have incentive to figure out
how to game the game whatever it is as
long as we still have separate interests
and the separate interest which is that
any in group can advantage itself at the
expense of an out group or any
individual canta JIT self at the expense
of other individuals which is grounded
all the way down to like a private
balance sheet I do think is an
inexorable basis of rivalry and I do
think that rivalry in a world of
exponential tech does self-terminate and
given that I don't think we can stop
progress of tech I do think we have to
create fundamentally anti rivalry
systems and I don't think you can do
that with capitalism or that or private
property ownership is the primary basis
to how we get access to things I don't
think you can do it with communism or
socialism or any of the other systems
we've had but I don't think that if we
look at how the coordination system of
cells or organs inside of a body works I
don't think it's capitalist or communist
I think there's a much more complex way
of sharing information and provisioning
resources within the system you know
this is how the famous anarchist Peter
Prince Peter Kropotkin got in trouble I
think he was like kind of an amateur net
naturalist and he would observe things
like ant colonies say look look how well
the ants cooperate and of course he
didn't know that it was a haploid
diploid system where sisters are more
closely related to each other than to
the offspring and you had a you know a
breeding queen and then effectively
mimicking some kind of body division
into soma and germ where your somatic
cells have no possibility of leaving a
permanent trace of themselves but for
their ability to aid your germline cells
that can become a fertilized you know
egg and embryo I don't think there is an
adequate biomimicry example okay and I
think there's an important reason why is
I think that technology creation is
something that we don't see happen in
nature anywhere else and of course
animals will use a tool but they don't
evolve better tools or to develop better
tools the way that we develop better
tools and the distinction of technology
creation or tool making as a process by
which new stuff comes to exist as
opposed to evolution as a process by
which new stuff comes to exist is at the
heart of a lot of the things that I
think about here because I think it
fundamentally changes our thinking on
like social Darwinism and why markets
are kind of a viable or an extra bolide
eeeh is if we think about evolution as a
process
by which new things come about defined
by mutation survival selection and then
mate selection within an environmental
nation and of course there's recursion
on niche creation in in evolution we see
rivalry everywhere as you are mentioning
in like biology there's a lot of really
painful things to look at and I think
we've especially since Darwin modeled
ourselves as apex predators for a long
time and but I think and I think that we
actually even reified the theory of
markets with evolutionary biology to say
that demand is like a niche and that the
various versions of a product or a
service are like mutations and the
company that survives because it's able
to supply the demand well those ideas
and those technologies make it through
and then if there's a couple that are
mutually good we're merging would be
good so you get a merger and acquisition
that's kind of like mate dynamics right
like recombinant work dynamics and this
is why competition is good and drives
innovation and same as happens in nature
I think that's kind of the way that a
lot of people think about markets and
relationship to evolution and I think
the reason we can't think about it that
way and also the reason why we don't see
whether it's ants or whether it's cells
in the body or anything why we don't see
examples of the kinds of coordination in
nature that will apply to humans is I
think that the development of technology
both language and social coordination
technologies and physical technologies
but our capacity for abstraction and
then things that increase our power via
abstraction as opposed to their power
increases via some instantiated thing
like a gene is a fundamentally different
process because in nature you will see
rivalry you'll see obviously one if the
lion catches the gazelle the gazelle
dies if the gazelle gets away the lion
might die right and yet all lions and
all gazelles are symbiotic with each
other meaning if there were no lions the
gazelles might eat themselves to
extinction if there were no gazelles
lions mites
so there's this process by which micro
rivalry leads to macro symbiosis and
both of them evolving supports each
other to evolve as the Lions get a
little bit faster they eat more of the
slower gazelles the faster ones genes
recombine and you get faster gazelles
yeah but I mean you know mathematically
I think the lotka-volterra equations is
this predator
so very simple predator prey dynamics
with like let's say two species I
understand how that can be stable right
I don't understand that in the presence
of exponential tech I mean they're not
okay that's so the first thing that I
got trying to be concrete here is that
maybe something like the technology of
reputation might allow us to leverage up
small group dynamics towards large group
dynamics the idea that I don't have to
know you to know something about your
reputation I see some hope there but
then it's open to reputational warfare I
think reputation systems will be gamed I
agree right with it look I'm very think
about game B yeah not because I don't
understand our need for it is that I
can't imagine the system that gets us
out of our nature and our nature you
know rivalry abounds within nature
cooperation it's found everywhere I
don't see a way of getting everything
towards universal disclosure and
cooperation but I'm I hear you are one
of the people who was the farthest along
thinking about how we might pull this
off yeah and I know I told you earlier I
have to apologize for a strange night
that had me not sleep so operating at
low capacity so I think I'm less clear
than ideal but no I want to say a little
bit more because just saying make large
groups work like small groups is like
that doesn't help at all I want to
actually say a little bit more about
how we would do that sure it
specifically why the tool-making thing
is such a big deal and why the
biomimicry examples don't work because
it specifically then plays into what
does have to work the mutation pressures
that are happening in nature are
relatively evenly distributed across the
system we think about mutation survival
selection and then breeding selection
and so you don't get a situation where
one species gets a thousand x advantage
in a single quick jump independent of
all the other ones right the mutation is
only going to be so big and the mutation
forces that are happening on the lions
are also happening on the gazelles right
so they're all experiencing gamma rays
or oxidative stress or copying errors or
whatever similarly so that's one thing
and then the other thing is that there's
co selective pressures as as the lion
gets a little bit faster then the
gazelles end up getting faster because
the slower ones get eaten and the faster
genes recombine and so because of the
pair because of the even distribution of
mutation and because of the co selective
pressures there's a certain kind of
cemetry of power that happens right the
gazelles get away as often or more often
than the Lions get them and so you only
get the situation where micro rivalry
leads to macro symbiosis when you have
and also the situation of metastability
of an ecosystem when you have something
like a cemetry of power within the
system asymmetry of power yeah if the
Lions got a thousand times more
predatory in one generation they would
end up eating all the gazelles and then
going through their own collapse the
they get they get they increase their
per date as they increase their potato
capacity the environment increases its
capacity to respond to the per date of
capacity symmetrically similarly I mean
this works up to a point I mean part of
the problem is is that gazelles are not
the only thing that dying on Lions that
Lions dine on right well and furthermore
you know lions are not the only even
even if lions are atop some predator
hierarchy one lion in 20 hyenas is not a
reputation for it's not a recipe for
lion happiness so you have you have very
complex dynamics with with many species
interacting and that's what I mean you
have meta stability of the whole
ecosystem not stability because some
species will die off and other species
will emerge but you have okay an
increase in orderly complexity but there
is a parallelism between lion and lion
between lion and hyena between lion &
gazelle right and if there wasn't you
would have you wouldn't end up having
metastability you'd have something have
a runaway dynamic that was unchecked by
the dynamics of the environment so
basically the the forces of the
evolutionary forces that are happening
are happening across a whole solution
the whole system and Co affecting each
other but with tool making tool making
didn't occur for us with a mutation tool
making was us consciously understanding
that this sharp rock that maybe a chimp
would experientially use a sharp rock
and then use another sharp Rock and
realized this rock was experience a
sharper but it wouldn't understand the
abstract principle of sharpness to make
sharper Flint things our capacity for
abstraction leading to tool making like
that made us increase our predatory
capacity radically faster than the
environment could become resilient to
our increase per date of capacity and
that was the beginning of a curve that
has you know started to vertical eyes
exponentially recently but because of
that tool making we could put on clothes
and go to the Arctic and become the apex
predator there in a way that the lion or
the cheetah couldn't leave its
environment we could we could go become
the apex predator in every environment
and over hunt the environments and then
when we would over hunt an environment
rather than have our population come to
steady-state we could go move to and
start over hunting in other environment
and then figure out a grow culture
that's super different than every other
animal and so you don't have a situation
anywhere in nature where like a single
lion could do that much damn
to its environment but you do have a
situation where a single person like a
Putin or a Trump or whatever could do
massive damage because of Technology 2
the total biosphere you don't have a
situation where a single cancer cell can
propagate cancer genes instantly to the
whole system it's gonna affect the cells
around it which have a chance to then
correct it there's a lot of corrective
mechanism so the exponential tech
increases our leverage so much that if
we that individuals and small groups
have the capacity to influence the rest
of the human space but also the bio
space in a way that nothing else has so
there is no example anywhere in biology
of a system that can that has the kind
of asymmetry relative to its whole
environment that we have so yeah if I
understand correctly I mean the slight
adjustment I would I would give is that
orcas get you part of the way there
because they're a broadly distributed
apex predator they occur in southern
northern seas they have all sorts of
different strategies the thing that that
you're coupling it to which I think is
very interesting is that nobody has seen
a 10,000 fold increase in Orca
efficiency as a predator so it may be a
we couldn't because as they start eating
too many of the fish then they can't
keep breeding you know I understood that
point so my my point is that you said
you were trying to indicate that you
could just keep changing your
environment like your clothing becomes a
microclimate so that you're able to
become the eight the the polar bear is
no longer the a prick apex predator of
the Arctic right and you could make the
argument that the Orca is not the apex
predator of the Seas because we're in
the seas and I think the example there
is just to think of an ocean trawler
with a mile long drift net and the
number of fish it pulls up compared to
an orca and you realize that we can't
model ourselves as apex predators that
are competing with others to see who's
maximally dominant with that much power
without either story this is a very
interesting point and I think the idea
that we are without precedent
many of us accept we don't know of any
other species that has language ability
to coordinate the way we do all those
certain social species from African dogs
to orcas to what have you you know are
pretty impressive and their ability to
coordinate in one form or another so
what I hear you is saying is the tool
use and the extended phenotype if you
will to use Richard Darwin's concept
like for example these microphones are
part of our extended phenotype because
they are tools that allow us to do
something yeah okay that changes the
picture and it also ends up introducing
both a fundamental thing about the
problem and the solution I'd recommend
tell me about the solution okay and then
tell me about the problem I want to have
well which order would be better
logically I just I would love to get to
the positive uplifting yesterday so so
we can say that what's particularly a
primary thing that's particularly unique
adaptively about homo sapiens
yeah is our capacity for technique right
our capacity for tool and that social
tools like language and democracy and
but also physical tools and they are all
abstract pattern replicators rather than
instantiated pattern replicators right
so it memes rather than genes so you
could say that what humans selected for
our genetic selected for mimetics our
genetic selected for radical
neuroplasticity and the capacity to have
much more significant software upgrades
that could change our capacity without
needing hardware upgrades and so and I
would argue that this is partly why we
have such a long period of neoteny right
why we have such a long period of being
totally helpless on the outside is
because I'm gonna give up on trying to
get you to redefine the words that are
going to cause people to have to go to
their dictionaries I think one of the
one of the things that I've said about
this podcast is that we made me miss
speak we may use language improperly but
we should at least play with it and
people to look things up on their own
hey I only was doing that because I
listened to the half-hour thing that you
said did say you're gonna let people go
look at their dictionary yep so I bring
this rule you're playing me against me I
love it
all right so an extended period of
neoteny go on yeah so we're embryonic on
the outside meaning we're helpless for a
super long time compared to anything and
obviously there are some animals like
birds that are more helpless than other
ones for longer periods but nothing like
us but we don't if we came hardwired how
to be fit to our environment that would
make any sense because we change our
environment so fast most creatures
emerged evolved to fit an environmental
niche but as niche creators as
significant as we are both because we
moved places then you know like this is
not an evolved environment and it's not
that adaptive for me to throw Spears but
I do need to be good at texting so we
had to come to be able to learn language
whether I'm learning English or Mandarin
whether I'm learning spear-throwing or
texting or whatever and so what I would
say is that essential to human nature is
the depth of nurture capacity relative
to other species and so when I look at
the thing we call human nature I look at
how much I think the social sciences
don't factor that there is Oba quit is
conditioning that we're doing the social
science within that is Rubik what is
conditioning and there are outliers that
are actually relevant that aren't just
genetic all right so if I understand you
correctly and now we're gonna just
totally geek out we are the most case
selective of species that is that we put
the largest investment into our young we
delay reproductive maturity for 12 times
around the Sun seems crazy and therefore
your point is we've got an unparalleled
opportunity for teaching for adaptation
because we unlike the wildebeest who has
to be more or less ready good to go
almost from the moment of birth minutes
Yeah right
the idea is that we are in the luxurious
position of having a long period of
development and knowledge transfer
because we are more about the extended
phenotype and we look at this anthill
it's pretty amazing yeah so what that
tells me is I look at some outliers on
both sides of the bell curve of various
dimensions of the human condition and
let's say we take Buddhism for instance
we have something like three millennia
of 10,000,000 fluxing give or take
people who mostly don't hurt bugs across
different bioregions and across
different languages and that's really
significant when we think about the
inexorability of violence in humans and
then we look at say the Janjaweed or
some group of child soldiers where by
the time someone's a teenager they've
all hacked people apart with machetes I
think that the human condition can do
both of those human nature can be
conditioned to do both of those but then
I see that we have a system where in
general them as soon as a tribe figured
out as soon as a couple tribes were
competing for resources it was generally
easier to move than it was to war until
we had moved everywhere in which case it
was it started making sense to war and
then as soon as any tribe militarized as
every other tribe has to militarize or
they lose by default
and the game of power has begun in in
earnest in that way the human on human
game and I think we've seen that the
peaceful cultures largely got killed by
the warring cultures and the warring
cultures learn from each other how to be
more successful at it and so the thing
that we have now is something that has
emerged through iterations on power
dynamics and it's conditioning everyone
within it and then we do all of our
social studies within that and say this
is human nature Wow
so this is a very weird place to get
brought back to because I'm I'm on the
escape branch of our decision tree and
what you're talking about
is possible when you can do better by
investing in peaceful and kind
alternatives I don't know what to call
exactly but nonviolent alternatives and
as soon as things become kind of steady
state zero-sum you start eyeing other
people those protein sources because
that's the way to grow a slice and I
don't know how you get out of this in a
finite world so maybe the idea is that
you're you have a concept of escape
yeah that isn't physical escape I think
Malthus was right at the time but wrong
fundamentally mmm-hmm where he said
resources are reproducing geometrically
or humans reproducing geometrically
resources arithmetic aliso there's
either not enough or there's not going
to be enough certain point well he
hadn't got to the point that some
cultures went into negative population
amounts in lower birth rates without an
imposition it's not just China's you
know one child in position that did that
but we've seen birth rates low enough in
some of the Nordic countries and in
Japan and he hadn't got to the point of
seeing the phenomena that bring that
about or the ability to recycle
effectively and which means not a linear
materials economy so I'm starting is I'm
starting to guess where you're gonna go
so if I if I understand you correctly
the idea is that you're going to look at
all of the places we've been a little
bit sloppy like recycling wasn't a place
that we put too much attention and
increasingly as we understand that stuff
is limited we we have more of a reason
to be careful about our land use rare
rare resources I think I get that part
of it then you have another idea here
about development is kind of unused and
we could do something far greater and
then you just had another one as
slipping my brain population oh that we
would start to see fertility below
replacement rates so that you would
actually go into population decline as a
means of taking pressure off of the
system yeah so I see the possibility for
a steady-state population
that is within the carrying capacity of
a closed-loop materials economy but that
is fueled by renewable energy so you
basically have a finite amount of atoms
so you circle the atoms you don't have a
finite amount of energy because you're
getting more energy every day be of a
finite amount per day and so you have to
be able to cycle the atoms within the
energy bandwidths and you're cycling it
from one bit pattern into another bit
pattern right like from one form into
another form and the forms are stored as
a bit so you have atoms energy and bits
and you don't really have a limited
number of the bits that you can have and
so we can have a economy where it's
getting continuously better but not by
getting bigger but by getting better we
continuously make more and more
interesting things with the same format
listen you've always had the possibility
of decoupling economic growth from let's
say burning fossil fuels we just haven't
gotten around to doing very well okay
what I'm starting to hear is that you
believe potentially that maybe we should
embrace declining populations as a means
of either and I don't put words in your
mouth but I'm just trying to guess ahead
one possibility is is that we need to
amplify the people who can live
peaceably and that maybe the idea is
that people who can't live peaceably
need to be incentivized to maybe have
fabulous somatic lives but without
reproducing I don't know so that we can
drive certain traits towards zero maybe
the idea is we just need to take ambient
pressure off the system and so we need
to go into a world where eight-billion
becomes 6,000,000,000 becomes 1 billion
and we start dropping down again I think
we see that obviously birth rate is
higher where there's poverty and we
might lose some kids right and so as we
just get out of abject poverty birth
rates go down and then as total economic
quality of life and the choice
abilities for women and education and
other things go up we start getting too
much lower birth rates and no I'm not
concerned that the birth rate will just
collapse forever we'll come to some
steady-state birth rates but those are
happening as a function of increased
good things increased quality of life so
in other words if you make the
opportunity cost for childbearing
enormous by making sure that let's say
females have outrageously great career
prospects and it starts to become much
more fulfilling did she doesn't wanna
spend their whole life pregnant well
look I mean the there's different issues
with women not realizing that most of
their children will survive which is
happening in the demographic transition
so people miscalculated for a period of
time leading to fears about runaway
population booms so that's that's one
effect and then there's another one
about if you give people education if
you give if you educate women the
opportunity costs of staying home and
raising children starts to impress
itself and so people will have fewer
children yeah but I think where you're
where you're headed is super interesting
and part maybe it's one of the reasons
that people might find it rather
disturbing making life awesome for
females might mean having far fewer
children yep all right so that's a good
thing in 'shmock did burgers well yeah
this is so both I mean the Malthusian
trap right the Malthusian situation is
both the geometric production
reproduction of humans and the
arithmetic reproduction of resources and
I think neither of those are true
inexorably true I think we can keep
cycling the resources and so basically
we can have a steady-state human
population within a renewable materials
economy carrying capacity but we're
we're keep but we keep innovating on
bits so we keep making more and more
positive and interesting things so we
keep getting an increase in quality of
but not by increasing the quality the
quantity of the pie and the quantity of
people consuming it but the quality of
it well the world of Adams I can't have
Bill Gates home in Washington State but
in the world of bits maybe I can live
there in my virtual reality and even
have much more fantastic places and so I
agree that bits have some ability to
create wild abundance that goes
non-rival rest's but i brought up a very
different concern which you may be
familiar with which is abundance can
kill you if you have if you look out
these windows and you see all of these
people engaged in activities without
being told to do so by a central
authority
what is it the ties that together for
the most parts markets with some amount
of state control of violence in the form
of policing okay so now you create
abundance an abundance has this weird
effect that it turns private goods and
services into public goods and services
where price and value are no longer
equal and suddenly you have people who
are producing things that are very
valuable and can't get paid right and so
how do we handle the takeover in this
hypothetical world where we get to an
economy of abundance that doesn't
actually cause a collapse of
civilization you can you can die from
abundance though a market can die from
abundance but I'm not proposing a market
society I okay so I like that so the
idea is that we welcome the destruction
of the markets to be replaced by and
it's important to say obviously if I
have a situation where valuation is at
least largely proportional to scarcity
then I have a basis to continue to
manufacture artificial scarcity and if
something becomes abundant enough it
loses value then of course abundance and
markets don't go together I'm very
excited about any credible thing that is
better than markets because markets well
laden with problems
have been pretty amazing and what they
produced yeah I'm not gonna criticize
the illusionary path here to say we can
argue straightforwardly why this path
can't continue why the nature of it self
trap I agree but the big problem here
has always been that we have so little
experience with self terminating our
rival risk desires well so this is why I
bring the Buddhists up all right and I
think the Buddhists got past one part of
the Dunbar number if we think about it
we think of a couple of Buddhist
countries for our listeners at home that
they can keep in mind while you're
talking about but this mostly they don't
have countries anymore there are
Buddhists in a lot of Southeast Asian
countries so there are Buddhists in
India there are Buddhists there's a lot
of Buddhists in Nepal
obviously Tibet was Buddhist before
Tibetan stopped existing in that form
but and you know I could bring up Jane's
or others but they're so few of them
that it's a little bit easier to throw
it out as an outlier but basically
cultures that were widely peaceful but
it is important to say the widely
peaceful ones did largely get either
killed by warring cultures or somehow
taken over by them or they became
warring at a certain point and this is
why your escape hypothesis which your
escape hypothesis only works if we can
make a much better civilization but it
needs to not have proximity to the thing
to external sources of rivalry so that
it can develop I want to say you know
that one of the reasons I keep pushing
you on these things is not because I'm
trying to do a gotcha style interview
the concern let me just be open about it
is that there are so few people who are
thinking who are tempting to think
rigorously about what we actually are
and what we must become if we are to
have a long term future that I'm not I
believe that you or somebody was trying
not to flinch when it comes to a
description of how we got to this place
from the arms race that is read of tooth
and claw we've called called nature
and yet your point is maybe we can hack
ourselves into a situation with the
future where with exponential tech as
you call it we don't have a future and
here is the basis for rigorous idealism
and hope and so that's what I'm trying
to tease out no great yeah I don't think
that we are inexorably rival hrus can we
take this weirdly into the the realm in
which it is hardest to imagine that we
are not rival risks we sense sex as the
precursor to reproduction the floor is
yours sir okay
this is going to make the conversation
weird no no I'm look I think that where
you're heading let me rephrase this
every branch of the decision tree has
gotten hyper weird and anybody who's not
looking at the fact that there is no non
weird branch of the decision tree is
missing the story of who we are and what
time it is in human history so I think
to not explore the weird to not dream
about what might be is the least
responsible least adult thing we can do
if we don't dream and we don't explore
the weird we're doomed
yeah all right with that the floor is
yours okay
I wanted to go somewhere with Buddhism
and why not an extra blue rival race and
that then if they were to actually get
the other side of the dunmer number
which is not just getting care beyond
the Dunbar number which they could do
through abstract empathy but also the
ability to calculate and coordinate
which they couldn't because they didn't
have the tech to do it and I'm basically
gonna say we can get something like abs
oh well okay I'll do this X thing into
Buddhism thing together cuz actually go
together I think we get something like a
certain level of empathy up to the
Dunbar number just through mere neuron
type effects through the fact that I
know these people they know me we've
lived together if they're hurting I am
gonna see it because they aren't
somewhere far away okay and similarly
I'm less likely to pollute in an area
I'm in then through an industrial supply
chain that pollutes somewhere that I'm
not so just a proximity where the cause
and effect has a feedback loop as we
start to get to much larger scales where
I haven't a cause and there's an effect
but I don't get a feedback loop on it
the broken open feedback loop is a
problem so I think the Buddhists were
able to Train abstract empathy not just
empathy for the people who I see hurting
but empathy for all sentient beings
throughout time and space right feeling
their connectedness with them that the
nature of the vows of the Bodhisattva
and they're not the only one right this
is different religions have tried to do
this but it's an example of a group
succeeding at it where they were able to
have a sense of positive coupling of my
well-being in the well-being of another
rather than inverse coupling they get
ahead and it's decreasing my ability to
get ahead what they the other side of
the Dunbar number was not just who we
care about but also our ability to
coordinate and I don't think they were
able to figure out coordination
mechanisms that are adequately effective
at scale okay I think if we do both of
those things we can make a fundamentally
different kind of civilization and
rivalry mostly comes down to today
private balance sheets which is I can
get ahead economically and that money
equals option
for most of the things that I want
alright and I can get ahead economically
independent of you getting ahead and
even at the expense of you getting ahead
or the expense of the Commons right and
so my near-term incentive can oftentimes
be a long-term disadvantage to others of
the whole so now this basis of where my
well-being and the well-being of others
were the Commons the Delta between those
is the basis for rivalry but then
dealing with that rivalry keeps
increasing coordination costs keeps you
know creating disinformation systems
where we can't coordinate effectively so
how we deal with the balance sheet part
there's a few things right now for me to
have access to stuff I have to mostly
with a few exceptions possess the stuff
right so possession and access are
coupled and if I possess something I
don't have to be using it I'm just
reserving the optionality to use it the
drill that sits in my garage that I
might not have used in a couple years
but at least it's convenient that when I
wanted it's there right but me
possessing something means that I have
access to it and means you don't have
access to it and so with a finite amount
of stuff the more stuff you possess the
less stuff I have access to rival risk
basis but we all know library type
examples or shopping carts where if I
have enough shopping carts of the
grocery store for peak demand time I
don't have to bring my own shopping cart
which would be a pain in the ass and
would require 10,000 shopping carts per
grocery store rather than 300 everybody
bringing them so what matters is you
having access to the shopping cart
doesn't decrease my access and we start
to see a potential for this if we think
about something like an uber and then we
think about self-driving eibar that then
has a blockchain that disintermediate
saat being a central company and being a
commonwealth resource where those were
you having access to it doesn't decrease
my access so we're not rival risks
anymore but then we take the next step
and say if you having access to
transportation then also allows you to
go to the maker studio that you have
access to to the science studio to the
educational places to the art studios
where you then have more
access to be creative but the things
that you create you aren't creating for
you to get more money and get ahead
because you already have access to all
the things that you want and you don't
differentiate yourself by getting stuff
you differentiate yourself by the things
that you offer because you already have
access to stuff so there's a
fundamentally different motive structure
then you having access to more resources
creates a richer Commons that I have
access to so now we go from rival risk
not just to non rival risk which is
uncoupled but anti rival risk meaning
you getting ahead necessarily equals me
getting ahead and so on when we look at
getting out of the Malthusian type
dynamics part of it is that we can
actually get out of the population
dynamics part of it is that we can't
actually get a closed-loop materials
economy with renewable energy that can
continue to upcycle and part of it is
that we can utilize our resources much
more effectively and much less rivalry
slee where we start decoupling access
from possession that'll start easily in
some areas be harder in other areas but
we start with in the areas that it
happens and so we start getting more and
more of a situation where I want you to
have access to more things because as
you're more creative than I get access
to more things that are the results of
your creativity so we're so this is an
example of removing some of the basis of
rivalry associated with balance sheets
okay I can go to sex underneath that now
if you want me to usually go where is
most natural to take the conversation
okay I will just try to fall
and the problem is if you go to sex
directly from where you are you are
describing the value let's say of
prostitution which is that people do not
have to make a commitment to a sexual
partner many people can have the same
sexual partner you start to get into all
of these very funny areas where status
for example is a very weird commodity do
I want you to have more status because
somehow that will give me more status do
I stop caring about status if there is
exactly one parcel of land which has a
unequivocally the best of you is that
something that I want you to have rather
than me having it yeah so let's talk
about status for a moment if I'm
comparing you and me in terms of who has
more dollars or who's taller or who can
run faster or some I can compare us on
the same metric right now and if status
is number of followers on Twitter then
whatever Kim Kardashian's most
interesting human being that's ever
lived and so I I think we know that
reductionist metrics on status are also
gamified and inappropriate but if we say
like MC escher or dolly like what was
more brilliant art I think it's a
meaningless question because they both
offered something completely novel to
the world and something meaningful and
beautiful that neither of the other ones
offered or could offer and I can't
compare them because I can't Metra sized
them and the reduction of that that's
the thing is I can't reduce totally
unique things to a fungible metric so
one of the problems I think is actually
fungibility and metric reduction
and so if you have status associated
with unique things that you offer to the
world awesome I'm not competing with you
writ large for more status I'm going to
people are gonna have a relationship to
me for the things that I offer and those
are really the people that I want to
have a relationship with me and if
you're offering things to the world that
people have a relationship to you for
and I see that the world is getting
better as a result of what you're
offering and I have access to more a
better world as a result of it I'm
totally stoked on that this is where it
starts to feel not real to me and no
yeah okay but let's but let's go through
the show here's why it sounds not real
alright I think so do we have a slowing
in technological progress yes and you
know less so in some areas than in other
areas but do we still have exponentially
growing technology in terms of both
cumulative amount associated with number
of people in globalization and in terms
of just technologies that are still
continue to grow yes of course we do so
is it 50 years or hundred years we don't
know but I really like I have to think
of this in a kind of a mythopoetic frame
that's how it occurs to me is it as we
as technology is empowering our choices
and we are getting something like the
power of gods you have to have something
like the love and the wisdom of gods to
wield that or you self-destruct and so
when I think about I think about the
rapture story or the Mayan calendar or
any of those stories in a metaphoric
sense as just like let's say you and I
were in the Bronze Age and we had just
seen a larger war than had ever happened
because there were some new better
weapons Android shoot further distance
and there were deserts where there
didn't used to be deserts because we had
got new better axes and saws and had
been able to cut down more trees and we
just thought about and we said we're
still developing better weapons and were
developing better economic extraction
tools were using our power in ways that
are coming
destructive in a narrow sentence and
destructive in a larger sense but
everybody is doing that this doesn't get
it happen forever so this phase defined
by increasing power on all sides used in
destructive ways constructive narrowly
but destructive broadly that phase comes
to an end and there's something like a
hard fork where if we keep doing
anything similar to that it'll come to
an end cumulatively whether existential
or catastrophic more likely catastrophic
right not full everything end but a lot
and to be able to have that much power
and not use it in ways that destroy the
system requires being actually good
stewards of power so then the whole
question for me becomes how do we make a
social system like what is the the
Bodhisattva engineering how do we make a
social system that is conditioning not
just individual humans but also
collectives to do good choice making
Omni positive kind of choice making well
I have to have a sense making system
that can factor things like
externalities ahead of time better and
that doesn't have things like multipolar
traps where if anybody is doing the
 up thing that everybody has to do
it and so I can start to think about
what architectures such a system would
have to have to be able to do sentence
making as to what externalities would be
and be able to internalize them and
where then I can actually confer rights
oice making and that we're developing
humans so again think about the the
education associated with some religions
bringing about less violence the
education associated with some cultures
bringing about higher average cognitive
capacity and being able to bring those
together as much as I know this sounds
like hippie and silly I don't actually
see anything other than a radical
increase in our good stewardship of
power it makes it I love the idea that
you think that there might be something
here but let me come back it with my and
again I'm not trying to be negative I
had it experienced at some point your
answer requires a warp drive
so we we both recognize the end-user
ability of this thing and then are
saying okay so what is the fundamental
thing and something Lou I'm not making
fun of you because what you're saying is
insane
what I'm saying is insane and the people
who are saying the most common
supposedly adult things are the craziest
of us all so I at least accept the idea
that we have to be here and I want you
on that branch and I want other people
on other branches because we need to fan
out and start exploring at least start
to care but I guess what I what what
this makes me think of it was a
particular moment in my life where one
of my closest friends brought his father
to dinner and his father was a guy who
was legendary in the film industry and
one of the things he taught his son was
never let the other guy get the first
punch in and I thought wow first strike
you teaching your child to strike first
nobody had ever suggested anything
remotely like that in all of my
upbringing I never heard anything like
this and I instantly recognized it for
what it was somebody was going to
parasitize whatever I had been taught
and say well great Eric's been taught
self-restraint Eric's been taught to
turn the other cheek
to make sure that you de-escalate a
conflict and goodie-goodie
more for me your multipolar trap right
okay there's a way out of it tell me I'm
dying to hear it so do we retrofit the
system no impossible foundational axioms
are all the wrong axioms can we can we
make a situation in which we can raise
children quite differently yes go to see
kids who grew up in an Amazonian tribe
or you know some very different
conditioning environment you'll see very
different types of human behavior
can we change already set adults much
harder not impossible but harder so can
we could we find adults that are that
would be the most likely to be fast
adopters of a new system like this and
capable so both kind of at the cutting
edge of their capacity to have abstract
wide empathy and bind that to their
action and you know deeply considerate
about actual cause-and-effect dynamics
factor complexity and work with other
people well can we find the ones that
are closest there and then train them up
additionally in some systems that are
developed for how to do a different
process of collaboration that doesn't
lead to one way of talking about it is
that when we go to command and control
hierarchy systems to get beyond the
Dunbar number we get diminishing returns
on collective intelligence as a number
as a function of the number of people
which creates an incentive to defect
against that system even internal
defection and so then we get a problem
if we could get collective intelligence
scaling linearly we get something
radically different so we get just the
number of people that are needed to be
able to do something like that trained
to do that
and we build a civilization a full-stack
ground-up civilization because obviously
I'm talking about not private balance
sheets and private property is the
dominant system I'm also going to talk
about not democracy because the nature
of voting is inherently polarizing to
populations because we make propositions
we're both voting for it and voting
against it suck for somebody for
something because they're based on
theory of trade-offs where we didn't
even tried to figure out what a good
proposition for everybody would be in
the first place so better systems of
sense-making in choice making which we
could get to and so let's say you have a
full stack civilization of people who
are capable and oriented to implement it
and you have not only much higher
quality of life for the people who are
there but innovative capacity to solve
certain problems the world can't
currently solve well because of no
disinformation in the system and better
coordination well then that system can
exce
port solutions that other places in the
world that would normally have an enmity
relationship with it actually need that
they can't solve for themselves so it
can create a dependence relationship
rather than an enmity relationship and
then they're like well why the are
you figuring out these pieces of tech
and we aren't we're like well we figured
out a better social system and if you
want it you're welcome to use it we were
open sourcing the technology here's how
here's how it works
but given that the technology as a
social technology is a social technology
of how people share information and
share resources and coordinate
differently it can't be weaponized
because it is kind of the solvent of
weaponization itself and so any other
group using it is just now that kind of
social architecture starting to spore or
to scale and so yeah I think you get out
of the multipolar trap by you don't have
to win at the game of power against some
external force to avoid losing at the
game of power so far if people didn't
focus on militarizing they lost to
whoever militarized and if they didn't
lose to whoever militarize is because
they militarized which means their
culture became a culture that supports
the ideas of militarization right but if
I focus on being able to have whoever
would militarize against me be able to
offer them things that are particularly
valuable that are novel to a collective
intelligence that can do better
innovation yeah you get out of a
multipolar trap that way I want to try
aggregating all the little bits that I'm
getting from you and seeing whether I'm
coming anywhere close okay all right so
the way I'm seeing it did is the father
first of all you're gonna point out to
me that there are all sorts of
interesting things that have not been
really effectively scaled up so your
point about Buddhism and Jains and
what-have-you
it might be possible to use this
enormous and luxurious developmental
period for something radically different
and that something you haven't said but
I'll throw
to mix and see whether you rejected is
that man's capacity for self that is
somatic eradication through fanaticism
tells you how powerful the software can
be that you can teach people to die for
a cause let's say and which is obviously
against genetic comparatives no it's
obviously against individual genetic
imperative but the genetics doesn't work
at the level of the individual it's
obviously against the somatic the
assumed somatic imperatives it could
actually benefit inclusive fitness I
think there's a very good reason to
imagine that you actually benefit your
clan if your deed is known so I know I
don't want to get into that but
fanaticism exists and maybe fungible I
think the Tamils for example probably
showed us that fanaticism can be used at
a political level as long as you get
access to children in Sri Lanka yeah
okay so our sister children was a key
thing I think so yeah right so the idea
is that you in effect and I don't mean
to put words in your mouth one of the
lessons of human history is that the
developed developmental process if not
used for the traditional Darwinian
imperative is available for other uses
and it is of arbitrary power yeah now
I'm gonna get into the ethics of it but
first I just wanna get into feasibility
so first of all there's an enormous I'm
gonna keep going back to square zero if
I don't get this all right first thing
is you're pointing it we're not on the
efficient frontier we're screwing up
everywhere we could be doing a lot
better appreciate that next point is
there are a ton of different things that
we haven't really looked at pushing and
we could afford to push on all of these
things principle among those things is
we should be using development for
something radically different and
studying cultures which have an
intrinsically sort of non rival risk
ethos
to them to see what have we already been
able to do and then we can engineer on
top of that Adams is are different than
bits Adams have a some somewhat finite
feel to them bits feels effectively
infinite so to the extent that we can
move things from atoms to bits and not
be coupled to a market system where you
have this problem of the de bundles
creates public goods and services which
causes markets to fail but then
something else succeeds in instead that
we can start to have abundance
particularly where we decouple and we
learn more about recycling
so that finite resources are much better
appreciated for what they are that we
can get to a point where we can start to
take pleasure in each other's pleasure
particularly if somebody's producing
something that is extremely positive for
that society I want to see Jackie Chan
given more money to make Jackie Chan
films so I'm not angry about that so now
we're scaling up all of these things the
things that haven't been noticed hacks
this than the other thing I like it
maybe it'll buy us some time here are
the things that really disturbed me
about it
one you'd have to grimace I mean I want
to have not grimacing and smiling okay
one is the the lot what is the minimal
level of violence and coercion needed to
bring about some of these changes so
this was something that I brought up in
my discussion with Peter Thiel and his
and my sort of somewhat mutual framework
really I learned something from him but
I tried to put my own thing back into it
is take take a beautiful dream ask what
the minimal level of violence and
coercion needed to accomplish it add
that in as part of the cost and ask
yourself is it still beautiful so that's
one of the questions that I would ask
you and then I get to the issue of
certain things like lakefront property
in the atomic world anyway are valuable
and unique
and it becomes problematic to imagine a
world in which all of our previous
experience was about competing for these
things to imagine 100% adherence to this
new way of thinking well let's go proto
pian not utopian let's go that there are
some 0u by proto P moving in the right
direction
alright let's say that there are some
things that are harder to make
adequately abundant than other things
but there's a lot of low-hanging fruit
that we can start moving and as we do it
we will get there's good reason to think
that there is a basis to do that in more
areas so in a system where when
something is more scarce it is worth
more then if I'm on the supply side of
that I have an incentive to manufacture
artificial scarcity and to definitely
prevent abundance that would debase the
value of the thing that I have in a
world where we remove the Association of
value and scarcity than where there are
actual scarcities the goal is to
engineer the scarcity out of the system
mm-hm and so if we're talking about
limited amount of Oceanfront then this
is where we say well can we do
seasteading and create a lot of
Oceanfront that is really awesome where
there is actually more to they're just
like more people are shopping at the
store then we need more shopping carts
and so part of the answer is how do we
actually increase the abundance but not
an exponential abundance because we're
talking about also steady-state
population and using and a lot of shared
resources and it's that coupled with
psychologically healthy or more mature
people that relate to these things
differently both of those are necessary
now there would be sufficient on their
own well I like that a lot
and I I do quite honestly take some hope
in that I'm finding that what people are
now rival RIS about has changed a lot I
think over the course of my life I think
Millennials are much more interested in
what what experiences have you had
recently rather than what have you
bought and purchased recently in part
because
economy kind of turned against them but
travel got cheap right and so that
that's been interesting to see do you
believe that we have a huge nearly
universal level up in maturity and
wisdom available to us through
development hacking yeah and so it is
both how we develop that socially which
I don't think will happen uniformly I
think will happen in pockets that become
strange attractors that other groups
want to then implement once seen because
they're so clearly better at both
quality of life and innovation and how
long that takes to develop widely is a
while like this is a multi generation
thing okay I think that that would not
be sufficient on its own but it's
necessary better sense making systems
where we can actually solve problems
without causing worse problems which
we're not historically good at is also
necessary and this is both some
evolution in our epistemic sand our
actual processes of collective sense
making and collective coordination so
yes I see level ups in both of those
possible right now I'm gonna ask a very
difficult question but we have to get to
it yeah
in essence I've got a riff which I don't
think I've said publicly which is that
the the biggest problem with discussing
sexuality is is that sexual sex is sexy
and if you have something that's central
to the world that is almost impossible
to talk about yeah it's a very strange
state of affairs assume that we solve
all of these problems that don't have to
do with status sex and reproduction
according to your most optimistic
scenario but we have trouble over here
that there's one last little pesky
problem yeah does this situation work
yes now I will speak to it because as
you said it is central and you're wrong
because it is central of course okay but
my speaking to it is probably going to
change the comment section of this video
but so be it you know what if they don't
want to come along for the ride they I I
think that the most important thing is
to just try to do this mean to say this
to be horrible but let's try to take
some of the stupid fun out of discussing
sexuality by talking about it for what
it is and a central system that has to
be discussed because it is the engine of
human behavior so your brother and I had
this conversation when we met and
obviously with his background
evolutionary biology and Prime a mating
and whatever I was very interested in
his perspective and it took a little
while but for what it's worth and let me
just jump in one second Brett were he
here yeah would break the theory of
selection into two pieces that would be
the stuff that follows natural selection
the way we expected from Darwin and then
you would break it into a second piece
which is the stuff that goes completely
counterintuitive due to sexual selection
right and that division is actually part
of the standard evolutionary teep
toolkit he does it a little bit better
and a little bit differently but that
division into natural and sexual
selection is part of the the territory
and it really matters for when we think
about resource scarcity because the
resources that people need to deal with
the first part the survival part are not
that much right actually but the
resources that people need to deal with
the mating part is more than the other
guy historically which is why the guy
with 150 foot yacht might feel bad when
the 200-foot yacht well this is up and
let's say this is closed if you're not
an evolutionary theorist I'm not but we
do our best there is a version of
evolutionary theory which states that
there needs to be crisis there needs to
be a function for showing that you are
better in order to keep individuals max
you know sort of on that razor's edge of
performance and that mating
opportunities means that there's always
a crisis there's never enough abundance
because somebody with 13 homes is more
desirable than somebody with 9 homes if
you're just trying to figure out if
there were a crisis I mean who would do
better right
so we have to overcome that because that
drives a Malthusian situation of no
amount of resource ever bring
sufficiency about right and drives a
fundamental rivalry which is why you
said we have to address it so what I'm
you my take on this as I explored it my
process with myself has been asking ok
as soon as I saw that the dynamics of
this world that seemed intuitive and
natural to most of us as we kind of grew
up in and were conditioned by it were
self terminating and I said any of the
things that we think of as normal I'm
willing to question deeply and so how do
I think could I imagine a high-tech
civilization that doesn't implode could
I imagine a kind of enlightened planet
what would life be like there all the
different things conflict emotion
resources and sexualities obviously one
of the big questions and I think I think
the book sex it wrong sex at dawn
obviously gets plenty of things wrong
it's trying to make a strong antithesis
to the standard evolutionary history of
Homo sapiens thesis but I think there
are some key parts to it when they look
at the moss wah people or the Canela
people or people that did not have that
had a stable society that was not
primarily pair-bonded but had multi-male
multi-female dynamics it's not to say
that's how humans mostly were that
doesn't matter it's to say that it's a
possibility if it's within the
possibility set same
Buddhism I'm not saying that's how
people know it in sort of it doesn't
have been just needs to establish proof
of concept and then we can try to scale
it up from yeah it's a positive deviant
analysis for proof of concept to then
say can we make that actual is that a
viable model for a new center and is
that a possible thing to make and the
fact that it didn't make it through
evolution so far like evolution has a
blind quality to it right where it'll
make a a DAP tation that makes sense in
the moment DISA determined by something
like warfare that is actually not that
good long term receivin self terminating
long term so the argument if it would
have been a good system it would have
made it well the thing that has made it
is continuing to up ratchet rival risk
capacity oh and that itself is gonna
self-terminate metaclass hacking that
somehow we've hacked ourselves new
positions we can keep surviving yeah and
so one one version says that we can
never escape the evolutionary
imperatives the other says we will all
we have always escaped whatever our last
problem was and so we should be expected
that even if there's only the sliver of
hope we should exploit it to the fullest
yeah and so generally this situation
happens that we have a near-term
incentive to pursue some advantage but
where the disadvantage of that thing
might happen over a much longer term and
that's like one of the fundamental
problems right the externality might
show up over hundreds or thousands of
years but the benefit occurs over this
year so I have to do it so we have to
get over that actually if we're
affecting the world in such fundamental
ways over the long term we have to
actually be factoring that into our
decision making now that's one of the
minimum requirements of a game be if
it's going to exist which also means of
a viable civilization at all so when it
comes to status because I think status
and sexuality go largely together it's
not exactly one for one but there
there's a strong correlation I was
listening to you on a few podcasts and
you were talking about B Prime and
talking about spinners and your kind of
geometric unity and I was just
loving it and I was loving even the
status of like you described
theoretical physics and mathematics well
which are topics that you know so much
better than I do but that I'm fascinated
by and educating the public about it and
there was no like status competition
impulse in me that was like oh boy wait
he is being seen as smart for these
things I was like wow this
awesome I hope that he gets more status
doing that because it's obviously good
for the world jeez I have such different
intuitions about this I mean you know to
be blunt about it
I didn't really talk about this stuff
for ages and there was a part of me that
cared about status but this was always a
part in fact I really to the extent that
I think that I have anything interesting
and new it is a very uncomfortable
feeling I mean I could show you all
sorts of cool things on you know if I
came up with a new lick on the guitar I
would enjoy showing it to you this is
something I feel very I have felt very
uncomfortable about and there are ways
in which well
it's very apart for me from the status
game I've been fascinated looking at
some of the comments where people say
you know so-and-so is in it for the
grift and they just want money and this
is an ego trip and I have to say the
least fun part the reason I didn't do a
podcast for a long time and the reason
that I I didn't commercialize this and
I've left a lot of money on the table
and I'm intending to commercialize this
is that I was very uncomfortable with
all of these issues they didn't like it
and I think people imagined that their
first few increments of status are fun
so that getting more and more status
must be awesome and I actually don't
think that that's true I think it's a
little bit like wow my first my first
taste of heroin was pretty sweet I
should do this all the time it goes into
some completely different place yeah so
that is counter to the narrative that
we're all seeking maximum status and in
competition with each other for status
well if you yeah I think that there is a
that is a low-resolution narrative right
I think that you know it's like it's
always make fun of the fact that
evolutionarily you're crazy for sugar
and the fact that they give it away for
free at Starbucks you know there's some
part of you that's a three-year-old kid
just wants to use many packets of sugar
as you possibly can it's not going to be
a good thing right yeah keep going I'm
sorry about that well so this is the
thing I think I think it's actually true
that there's a lot of status that is not
really that fun this is also my
experience but I think it's also true
that we can feel good about rather than
bad about where someone else is doing
socially well well if we yeah I mean if
we if we have a kind of love and trust
and we have an idea like you know I'm
friends with Andrew Yang and I disagree
with a bunch of his policies but I have
a feeling that he is a guy who's just
earnest you know I'm knowing knowing him
socially I have the sense that
it is not an ego trip for him to want to
steward the country it's a-you know
you're taking on a position that puts
you in a life-and-death situation with
the number of attempts on presidents
lives let's say it's a very solemn
responsibility and I think that in part
we want people who we feel are grounded
and I by the way I'm not always grounded
you know so I've drunk my own status you
know to excess at times but it's a very
tricky thing who do I want to have
status who do I not want to ask that as
do I trust I have a friend who is the
nicest person in the world except when
he's doing well and then he becomes very
difficult to deal with you know so
they're like that there's the person
who's fine on one glass of alcohol and
you don't want them to have three yeah
so I think status as a hyper normal
stimuli we're in a evolutionary
environment we couldn't necessarily have
more than 150 people pay attention to us
yeah and now we can have a huge number
of people pay attention to us and have
it metro sized with likes or whatever I
think it is like sugar a hyper normal
stimulus that is very hard for it not to
be bad for us and we actually have to
have a very mature relationship to it
and addiction of any kind any hyper
normal stimulus that decreases normal
stimulus is going to end up being net
bad for us I think one of the metrics
for how healthy a society is is inverse
relationship to addictive dynamics
that's the healthy environment
conditions people that are not prone to
addiction which means have actual more
authenticity of choice because addiction
compulsion writ large is less
authenticity of choice and what's
interesting is the hyper normal stimulus
what porn is to sex with sugar and salt
and fat concentrated in a Frappuccino or
McDonald's is to food right devoid of
the actual nutrition or devoid of the
actual intimacy listen trading submits
that betray the Ultimates the the
originally the proximate stimulus
is tied to the ultimate and ice the the
brain keeps track of the proximate and
then you can disconnect some of these
like birth control disconnected
sexuality from procreation right and in
the same way if there was a healthy
status relationship of in a tribal
environment where I can't really lie and
people really are watching me and know
me if I'm thought well of it's because
I'm actually doing well by everybody and
I have authentic healthy relationships
as opposed to I can signal things that
aren't true hmm and not and they and
even get more status through negative
signaling about other people and things
like that and get a lot of hits from it
it's that is the same kind of thing as
the fast food or the corn is and so I
think we have a hypo normal environment
of the healthy stimulus that actually
creates a baseline well-being so most
people I find that when they go camping
with their friends and they're in nature
and they're actually in real authentic
human relationships they're checking
their phone for dopamine hits from email
or Facebook less and they're also
looking opening the fridge just blindly
looking less often because they're
actually having an authentic meaningful
engaging interaction but in a world
where I have a lot of isolation nuclear
family home structures etc and not
connected to nature and not necessarily
connected to meaningfulness that much
that hypo normal environment creates
increased susceptibility to hyper normal
stimuli hyper normal stimuli happened to
be good for markets because on the
supply side if I want to maximize
lifetime value of a customer addiction
is good for lifetime value of a customer
but it is very bad for society as a
whole this I really like so if I
understand you correctly
people don't I mean this actually starts
to solve a puzzle I think I heard that
somebody asked Matt Damon whether he
enjoyed being famous and he said it was
if I have the story right and maybe
somebody else I forgive me if I'm wrong
he said it wasn't even fun for 15
minutes and this is the hardest thing to
convey is that if you've never had any
kind of status at all right that you
know I I think I said to Tim Ferriss
that you only wanted to be famous to
3,000 hand-chosen people want your calls
returned you know you you want to be
taken seriously when you have something
to say you do not want to be universally
known and that was the hardest decision
and starting this podcast was I didn't
think I had another option I mean part
of the point of it is to get out ideas
that I worry are not institutional you
know there's no institution that's
embracing these ideas and I couldn't
figure out met Redford for months is
there a way to do this without becoming
part of the story right and because I
think that privacy and an individual
life is so much more important and I
don't believe that every time you bring
something up you know it means that you
should have your life ripped open and be
dissected and discuss it's very
unnatural I think what you're trying to
tell me is that people think that they
want to be fabulously rich they think
they want to be famous they think they
want unlimited sexual access and in fact
it is the first few tastes of these
things that convince them that there
must be no limit to how wonderful the
world can be if only that can be mine
and in fact there is something I mean
it's sort of you know like rosebud at
the end of such a yeah those are much
more like addiction and fulfillment and
addiction
we'll give me a spike and then a crash
and then because of the crash I'm more
craving something that will spike me
because I feel really shitty and but
then I get an erosion of baseline over
time from the effects of that and so of
course the chocolate cake is gonna make
me feel good in the moment but as I have
a mostly chocolate cake died at my life
feels shitty er as I average right as I
do the integral under the curve it gets
worse whereas the salad doesn't really
give me that spike but as I get
healthier my baseline of pleasure
throughout not just when I'm eating but
all of the time goes up because I have
the capacity to engage in more
interesting meaningful things and my
body doesn't hurt as much in whatever so
I think the interesting thing is that it
is actually just like a healthier
relationship to or a more effective
relationship to pleasure is anti
addictive but I think most of these
things that people think they want are
hyper normal stimuli that is the
dopaminergic part separated from the
substance I don't know how much I
believe this but I like it a lot so if I
understand you correctly there is a
world of pleasure I don't even want to
call it pleasure I don't even know what
to call it maybe it's much more on
fulfillment that we would give up that
no let me say it differently what you're
really saying is we are blind to the
effect that somatic pleasure and Status
pleasure is crowding out fulfilment in
our lives and that were we to actually
understand the cost of pleasure of
rivalry that there is an individual
reason to abandon somatic pleasure as
the be-all and end-all how we how we
create a life I mean this is how many
how many awesome trips to Vegas did I
did I have is that the thing that's
going to matter most to me on my
deathbed yeah I don't think it ever has
and I don't think it's ever what people
would be most hopeful that there let's
give it a name because I don't think
I've ever been down this particular
route let's call it deathbed mindset for
the moment just to play with it see if
it works and if it doesn't work we'll
trash it
so people on their deathbed become
focused on did I do enough for my
community do my children think well of
me I think what happens is people
realize that everything they got dies
with them like all in the end its
lineage only and the way I touch the
world continues and there's not just my
biologic kids lid each of my thoughts
yeah like memes along with genes and so
I think when we really start to think
about this clearly we recognize that
this direction is self terminating the
need to get stuff from the world that
when I die it ends with me that there is
actually only a kind of self
transcendence and permanence in the way
that I touch the world which does ripple
ongoingly but there's also this thing
where yeah again it I feel almost a
little bit shy talking about it even
even more than the sex topic in some
ways because I'm proposing that there is
something like spiritual growth I think
it's actually necessary for civilization
to make it
and so people affirming that they are
these kind to themselves needy things
that need stuff from the world yeah that
need other people's validation and
attention and etc and living life that
way were the more of it they get what
they're still getting as a self the
affirmation of that sense of self as
opposed to coming from a place of
wholeness and the desire and actual love
for the beauty of life and the desire to
have their life be meaningful to life
that my life ends but life of the
capital L doesn't end and that life
starts to be central to my awareness
more than my life is and my life becomes
meaningful and it's coupling to life
this answers the sex question it also it
answers all the other questions but I
don't think there is a there to break
through to yeah and the problem that
we're having conceiving of it in your
money now again I don't think this gets
that of all the issues that I've raised
but I think it's the first point at
which I start to see there's something
really different about your perspective
so just as a slow learner if we take the
kind of Gerardi an idea of all desire as
mimetic and I'm oversimplifying it but
just meaning I want what other people
have and then that inexorably causes
conflict and then the conflict will
inexorably cause violence I think there
is statistical truth to all three of
those steps but not inexorable truth to
any of them mmm I don't only want things
that other people have I you know or
that I that I learned from other people
there's there there are things that are
just intrinsically fascinating to me or
there are wanting for other people it is
not wanting for myself anything in
particular just actually caring about
wanting for other people there are
innate creative impulses where I don't
actually need to see and eat like I have
a friend who is a savant pianist
brilliant pianist and he almost never
will play for anybody because his
experience of playing is so beautiful
that he doesn't want to cheapen it by
having somebody else hear it and move
into a performative place and it just is
his own communion with music itself so I
think there is desire that emerges from
our connection to life not just the
social layer and then even if you're
doing something that I'm inspired by and
I want to do something like that too
they don't have to create conflict I can
be okay with you having something and
want to share it or share in that type
of phenomena yeah okay now I'm starting
to you know I have a friend for example
who's a fantastic guitarist and I
noticed that when we play together he
doesn't play at his peak ability because
he wants the pleasure of playing
together yeah to to be that the thing
that we share if I was a better
guitarist it would be more fun
to trade things back and forth but the
danger of going out of shared experience
is far greater and so you know I yeah I
I know the things that you are saying
are true and perhaps what I've been
saying back to you could be retranslated
as the transcendent beyond the proximate
somatic pleasures that we have is so
rarely experienced at scale it's not
experienced at scale well a little bits
and religions in religion it happens I
think that in in families there are
things that people don't want to share
outside of the family because they bond
the family yeah and but it's just it's
hard to imagine a world in which people
stop coveting their own name and lights
you know people being impressed by by
their car their yacht their house this
than the other and I think that what
you're talking about
not hard for me to imagine well this is
the thing I mean the you know the odd
thing that I have in being the friend
and the employee of a billionaire is
that I sometimes get to borrow his life
yeah and you know he's made his home
available to me in Hawaii for example
and it's absolutely astounding to be in
control of an asset like that I have
another friend who lent me his Island
year after year but I also found that I
didn't want or need that and that both
of these gentlemen that I'm referring to
were much more focused on ideas than
they were on Faberge eggs or displaying
a Picasso or anything like that because
ultimately they found they wanted to go
their association with me was let's talk
about things that might move the needle
in human history rather than do you have
any idea how much this bottle of wine
cost and remember I was saying earlier
that I think dominant paradigms co-opted
psychology to define healthy psychology
as supportive of the paradigm so what
I'm about to say in terms of what I
think healthy psychology is is not the
current
definition of healthy psychology it is
one that would be fit to a to an actuary
viable civilization I think
psychologically healthy humans are
emotionally coupled to each other so 100
percent so when you're happy I'm happy
I'm stoked for you if you're hurting I
feel that I feel compassion and empathy
I think the worst psychology is the
inversion of sadism where I feel joy at
your pain rather than joy your joy and
we know your pain I think is a French
expression is not sufficient that one
succeed in life one's friends must also
fail yeah so that is a perfect statement
of what is most wrong with the world
right that's that that is the heart of
the worst part of game a but I think
jealousy is one step away from sadism
because if sadism is I feel joy at your
pain
jealousy is I feel pain at your joy or
your success or envy right and I don't
think that is a psychologically healthy
place for people I think it is a largely
we condition this because we watch
movies where we celebrate when the bad
guy gets it right and we condition the
 out of we celebrate when the bad
guy gets and we celebrate when our team
wins and the other team loses so we can
collectively decoupler empathy from
other human beings arbitrarily so that
we can then feel good in a war
supporting you know when that type of
thing occurs and we get conditioned that
second place is the first loser and all
those types of things but this is
conditioning again and conditioning of a
highly neuro plastic species so I think
our intuitions are all bad if we haven't
spent I'm really questioning these
things and then also looking at cultural
outliers because I don't think any of
this is inexorable is it is it Oh bik WA
tiss yes is it an extra bone oh but I
think what is ubiquitous is
psychopathology
well Daniel I think what I've gotten
from our conversation is is that you've
got a lot of examples that are at the
proof-of-concept level of things that
are under exploited you've got an
observation that we're far off the
efficient frontier that there's one
giant overlooked opportunity which is
the
we are so radically k-selected that our
developmental period from age zero to
thirteen could be used for something
radically different which i think is the
the biggest hope in your whole complex
of ideas together with the idea that
there are realms beyond somatic pleasure
that most of us spend our entire lives
not knowing what it's like to break
through the status and wealth and
security games and effectively we have
no idea at the top of Maslow's hierarchy
when fully realized is and that it might
be possible to at least begin the game
to buy us some time to try to figure out
what we would do at scale now I still
don't see any world in which we can
defeat all these multipolar traps but I
think what you're really saying to me
again always correct me if I'm wrong is
that we could potentially change what
winning feels like and that when we do
that then this prisoner's dilemma is
don't look right any longer because I no
longer want to be the one who defected
while you cooperated so that I get off
scot-free and you wind up with a 20 year
jail term and we have to remove the
context of the prisoner's dilemma as our
model for the world right like actually
change the nature of the context and
because that is a fundamentally
inexorably rival risk dynamic right I
just I don't think you're gonna get rid
of all rivalry I just I see
opportunities for decreasing it I see
opportunities for changing the culture
the the the weakest part of your
argument to me at this moment and again
I'm just learning about it is the need
for universality with respect to this
evolution and I think that's the one
part of it that I find the hardest to
imagine we can actually get done so if I
have a system like a corporation where
my playing by the rules fully gets me
ahead less than me defecting on the
system internally and doing corporate
politics or a back-end deal or whatever
then I have the incentive to defect on
the system and it doesn't have the
collective intelligence to notice it
right because there's a diminishing
return on the collective intelligence of
the system as a function of more scale
if I could make a system and I I will
claim that we can and their
architectures that can achieve it we
could make a system where the collective
intelligence scaled with the number of
people then I would always have more
incentive to participate with it than to
defect and if I did defect because I had
a head injury the system would have the
intelligence to be able to notice that
and deal with it now this is the place
where I'm saying the Dunbar number was
both care and sense making it was a
limit on both you know our values
generation right and our sense making to
inform choice making so if we want
better systems of governance ie better
systems of choice making we need to get
both collective values generation and
collective sense making down the
conditioning gives us ways to start to
work with things like very different
value systems but I can't have a very
different value system while still
incentivizing meaning a value equation
economically where the whale is worth a
lot dead and nothing alive right and I
and it doesn't have adequate sense
making to even inform what good choice
making for everyone so we can
participate with the system is so
that'll have to take more time well I
look forward to continuing our
discussions and I want to thank you very
much for coming and sharing your ideas
with us here on the portal and just
briefly I want to say I think that I
think that you're doing this is awesome
I you know there there are people who
say we need divergent ideas and
heterodox ideas but that don't have
grounded clear thinking and you know
critical thinking and I think for you to
bring heterodox thinkers and have but
not just agree with them but have real
dialectic conversation that is earnestly
seeking to bring about
better understanding is beautiful I was
really excited about that
I I wish that I could have communicated
clearer having had better sleep last
night but hopefully it wasn't completely
unintelligible well I traveled from San
Francisco to do this and so I think I
was probably a little off my game at
particularly at the beginning but we can
do this again and I just want to say
those are incredibly generous and kind
words I'll take them to heart I'm trying
to get courage myself to do a little bit
more in this space and so far I got to
tell you the audience for the show has
been second to none in terms of behaving
really admirably and positively on the
internet I can't tell you how much great
feedback we've gotten super constructive
and I hope you think they will look
they'll embrace what you said in the
same spirit so thanks Daniel thank you
you've been watching the or listening to
the portal with Daniel schmock dude
Berger and I've been your host Eric
Weinstein thanks for coming through and
we'll see you next time
[Music]
you