I think it's something about what do you
see happening in the next medium in the
medium term what's your what's your
vision for what you're about to see I
think you said specifically in the
culture war peace and your question Dave
it was the red red red legend blue
dynamic well I actually heard two
distinct questions there one was what do
I see and what would I like to see which
would you prefer
oh forget the loss all right all right I
think I mentioned this in a different
venue and but I'll put it this way I'm
noticing that my hairstyle is vectoring
directly into the American Revolutionary
by pretty soon I'm gonna have a Thomas
Jefferson bow in my hair just because
it's gonna be necessary I think
everybody's going in that direction step
Alexander minor is going more than one
standing direction so one of the things
I think is a kind of a primary
opportunity right now it's simply like
growing up maybe or stepping into the
how do I say this
all right maybe I'll say it this way
this is just just a frame but you can
you can do this across a bunch of
different dimensions so this frame is
that hopefully this frame lands I've
done it before and I think I think it
worked out pretty well so one of the one
of the the things that I've discovered
or at least I've noticed is that human
beings have I think very distinctive
elemental stages in our lives there
really is a difference between childhood
adolescence young adulthood mature
adulthood an elder hood are there just
different stages neurologically
physiologically all of it all the way
down as you're talking to somebody
yesterday was give me a deep dive on the
actual neurological changes that
happened in men in their early 50s it's
a real thing all right so that's one and
then too we could talk about the notion
of their deep being different in this
Chronos Kairos there are different
states of the context that we find
ourselves in and the hypothesis that I
would put forward and I don't I don't
really matter too much whether my
hypothesis is any good but use it as a
as a way of thinking through the
question that you're asking this is a
way of of creating a model that helps
anchor that is that
things are good I think Dave actually
sent me that message I this bad times
creates strong then that one something
on that so during good times there are
things that can be done and should be
done by people at different
developmental stages but during bad
times there's a transformation that
needs to occur that there needs to be a
different capacity or identity we need
different things so for example in this
case what I would say concretely is that
the the elders really really need to
step into elder hood for the first time
in our live so I don't mean nearly
people who happen to have a lot of
calendar years on their on their
biography you've been around the Sun a
bunch of times I mean people who have
actually lived life and remember things
like they remember when people actually
used to sort of do things for the right
reason when people thought that lying
was shameful when people knew their
neighbors and cared for their neighbors
like they have an invited experience
that the things that we need to actually
relearn pretty quickly and they've
actually lived first person and they can
share their first-person experiences of
what meaningfulness actually is over the
long arc and I think I said this
previously I don't care that much about
the the stuff you know about the things
we do it's it's okay I'm it's cool I
really like the fact that you have
really deep learned experience about how
to change the you know the fuel manifold
in the 57 Chevy or how to read jigger
the way the IRS is COBOL system works
those are good skills but that's not the
time and elders that's not the role
right for an elder it's actually
stepping into helping people reconnect
with the foundational archetypes and the
deep sense felt sense of humaneness and
orienting people towards rightness like
calling people up into a greater sense
of the Commons and their role in this
bigger picture in the story in the in
the arc of Life right if you're face to
face right now with mortality bring
people back to feeling what it feels
like to be human beings alive in the
world
that's the elder right to step away from
snarfs ISM and entitlement and
themselves and particularly materiality
and step into the sacred fully and help
represent that for everybody
that'll be hard on my own cohort the the
maligned Xers right our problem are our
sin is that Sena cynicism the slacker
mentality the skeptical mentality the
how would I put it
as a generation we were all kind of a
bitch when it comes to it alright fine
we have to actually step into service we
have to take responsibility we have to
actually be willing to do the thing that
perhaps our lives have prepared us for
and bring that into into the hole all
right without cynicism without
skepticism with actually hope and in
most cases actually I don't mean I mean
very key and hope and the way that we
guys have been we've been talking about
it because most of us have kids now this
is that question we talking about
earlier we can't ask those kids to solve
these problems we have to solve the
problems and some of us have things some
of us have been working a long time
trying to figure things out and we've
been awfully beaten down look it up all
right I'm gonna call out shout out to
Eric right now Eric Weinstein you think
you've been shaking your finger at this
for an awful long time but we just have
to step up now to take personal risks
and this is the time where Gen X
actually has to be willing to put
ourselves right in the line and be
willing to take risks as individuals and
just say this is what we think is the
thing to do and we're willing to take
positions of responsibility and
leadership in service of the whole
that's that's the Gen X responsibility
then you got your millennial
responsibilities and think about this
day began from the point of view of what
does it mean in the context of the
culture war when people move from an
immature state to a mature state I think
that's really what I'm saying
the immature state resolves the culture
war in an immature way the mature state
resolve the coaster war in a completely
different basis it's a completely
different footing all right a bunch of
boomers who got mad at each other in the
1960s and 1970s and never got over it
and are still fighting about something
that's 30 years old when they step into
mature state and they recognize they're
both gonna die in a couple of weeks
anyhow and they might as well get their
 together they can heal those wounds
in a real way and recognize they have a
responsibility to heal those moves on
the basis and for everybody else that's
just got to get resolved and I mean
immediately all right
Gen Y it's actually taking
responsibility meaning okay good
we get it you've been coddled and put
upon
a long time and you were sold a bill of
goods that wasn't true and gen-x by the
way as Catania hasn't been true the
whole time but you know we suck at it
well guess what this is actually your
world right now this is the world you
will be the ones who are actually living
in to making this world so we're here to
help but you're gonna have to do most of
the work and take most of the personal
risk because worst case scenario we're
gonna die sooner than you do you're
gonna have to live through and endure
whatever happens after this so it's a
big thing but taking personal
responsibility doesn't mean trying to
carry burdens that are not your burdens
that's not how it works
by trying to imagine that you can do
things you can't do is not taking
personal responsibility taking personal
responsibility as things like not
injecting noise into the comments just a
simple thing like that if you know what
the you're talking about then shut
up ask for help right if a conversation
is going on and you have an impulsive
response to just drop nonsense into it
stop doing that if you're interacting
with somebody who is doing that tell
them to stop doing that
and that's that's like the simple simple
stuff but as people they actually begin
to behave in just a simple mature
fashion appropriate that a developmental
stage reality begins to reset itself and
things begin to happen and then of
course we've got the kids again so to
loop back to them and their job is to
just be kids God say can we stop making
them have to do machines
[Music]
you