[Music]
hello you found the portal
I'm your host Eric Weinstein and I'm
sitting here today with metallic beaut
uhrin the leader and a founder of the
etherium world of cryptocurrencies and
smart contracts welcome to the portal
thank you it's good to be here Eric it's
terrific to have you now in general when
I see you interviewed immediately
everybody goes straight to crypto
currencies in Imperium but one of the
things that I found fascinating about
your story is is that in order to be a
good steward of this new and emerging
economics you've actually applied
yourself a great deal to standard and
regular economic theory and I was
curious if I understand correctly you
dropped out of college after a year
you're self-taught in economics but
you've taken a real interest in
understanding how markets and economic
theory work is that a fair description
yeah I think so and economics has been
of an interest for me definitely for a
long time I mean when I discovered
Bitcoin back in 2011 and I was still in
high school it was this kind of
interesting confluence of ideas that I
was already pretty attracted to so open
source culture that was something that a
and a good friend from high school a
Christopher all I had already and if
indoctrinated me with really well I'm
the of the mathematical in cryptographic
aspects also libertarianism in Austrian
economics was kind of the zeitgeist of
the Bitcoin space at the day and those
were you know ideas that I definitely
found philosophically quite attractive
at that time and you know I was
definitely curious and I read a bunch of
books oh yeah and read the Austrian
economics Conine because that's what the
Bitcoin people were kind of talking
about all day I read some kind of
behavioral economics literature Ariely
Kahneman and
Chea DNA and all of those people just
because I knew that I had to read other
stuff for balance um and and and also
economics itself is a kind in pretty
mathematical and I've subject well kind
of right it's it's on the borderline
because it's kind of both mathematical
and you got your curves and your
derivatives and your intersections but
also as humanity is right it's like
really at this intersection of like both
figuring out how to apply these models
to and of specific cases and also trying
to figure out well which models are
really correct in the first place and
like the first question you can't answer
with math but the second question you
really can't and you need other kinds of
thinking as well was this is an area of
my own interest because the way I see it
economics is odd in a way that very few
people I think have appreciated in that
if we take what could be argued to be
our two greatest ideas in scientific
scientific man let's say one would be
sort of the geometric dynamics of
physics and economics has been
constructed to be an as if physics if
you will and on the other hand and
inherits from the theory of selection
you could say that markets are the
continuation of systems of selective
pressures by other means and so what
happens when our two greatest ideas
touch each other and they do it in a
place which has very bizarre properties
by my way of thinking that is that
economists are on the one hand very
rigorous thinkers and are also very
susceptible to what we might call
political economy and distorted thinking
does that ring true to you yeah
definitely there's definitely this kind
of combination of I think for on the one
hand you have these mathematical
formulas and on the other hand these
assumptions and often like the
assumptions can be pretty pretty well
hidden and they're kind of difficult to
see at first glance right in
it really can be subtle right so like
one of the arguments that economists
tend to put forward is basically like
mutually beneficial transactions are but
are beneficial and so like we should not
interfere with them right like if I have
a client battle and I want to sell you
the wine bottle you're willing to pay
five dollars then I clearly value it at
less than five dollars evaluated more
than five dollars therefore the
transactions on net good and like I
therefore I should give you the bottle
and you should give me the money and
that's what we would do but at the the
reasons why that ten sometimes breaks
down liquor in many ways more subtle
right like first you have monopoly
issues like if I'm the only person
selling wine bottles then I might want
to sell them at a yeah and a higher
price than you'd be willing to accept
because I want to extract more value and
sometimes the things that matter most to
society aren't things that we can
transfer between people from one person
to another like wine bottles but like
public goods and like the biggest public
good of all is it is the idea right and
an idea well if I have an idea and I
give you the idea I still have the idea
so it's something that once you release
it it's out there and there isn't this
kind of property of that so you know
should we just pause just briefly to
talk about what a public good is yeah
so a public good is technically defined
within economics many people have an
intuitive idea as something which is as
you're stating has this property of
inexhaustibility mm-hm
and then the other attribute would be
excludability which is non excludability
formal sorry not non excludability sorry
the the attribute of excludability
mmm-hmm and is used to define a public
good so if something is inexhaustible
and in excludable then it has this weird
property that even hardline economists
would agree that the market may fail to
price in fact will fail to price the
value to society of that object so there
is an
mission within economics that there are
zones of failure right
well I guess the kind of the big kind of
rethinking that needs to happen is that
there is a long been this kind of
site-geist to that private goods like
things that I have and if I give it to
you I don't have it and you have it are
the norm and public goods are a rare
exception but like really public goods
are pretty darn important right like if
we didn't have public goods then we'd be
a trading sticks and B and Bear pelts
and we basically still be cavemen like
they're basically the like an army would
be a public yeah yeah and or me well
armies are interesting cuz there are
kind of to us like in a medium scale
context or a public good and in the
large-scale context or a public bad
because if everyone's army is we're
forced to be cut down by a factor of 10
like we'd all be better off
so economics is like really subtle that
way especially once you have kind of two
layers of scale I'd play sure now one
thing that I worry a lot about that
almost nobody seems to join me in is
that in our mutual world I don't know
what to call it of people who are
experimenting with what I would say the
mainstream would consider far out ideas
like radical life extension crypto
currencies is a you know potentially
being rival risks with sovereign
currencies but in our world we talk a
lot about the abundance economy in a
world of abundance and I'm terrified of
a world of abundance because one of the
properties that software has had is that
it has replaced physical goods and
services which have these attributes
they are not public with small files and
when a small file is not encrypted it
has the attributes of a public good and
therefore value and price can can Qasim
that's terrifying because then this
weird thing of markets which allows us
respite from dictatorship in somebody
directing our activities and allows us
to self-direct goes
away because things can't be priced
accurately
are you do you have any does that have
any purchase on your thinking yeah so
and I think good give definitely you
kind of struck at a very important
points though I think and if my own
framing of the point is slightly
different no I think like first of all
like you start off by think by realizing
that kind of private property and things
is not something that fell out of the
sky it's a social technology right it's
that we have these kind of norms that
basically say oh you kid we will create
this kind of mapping from objects to
people and if an object as maps to you
then you're allowed to do basically
whatever the hell you want with it and
other people cannot do anything with it
without your permission and if that
concept did not exist then physical
objects would be public goods right
because like if there's a klein bottle
over here the quran bottle would be
there but like really anyone could take
it and if you produce wine bottles then
like you're not producing something for
yourself you're producing something for
pretty much the from the first person
who comes along and grabs it and so
property rights rate are this kind of
social technology that helps make
private great economy is tractable and
we could consider making social
technologies to make public great
economies tractable right like the
existence of public goods by itself is
and it's not good or bad like arguably
it's even good because it means that
people can cooperate with each other on
such large scales the bad thing is that
we don't really have good tools for
handling yet and specifically we don't
have good tools for handling yet that
managed to simultaneously avoid both not
giving good results and like basically
being centralized in dictatorial and so
this is where my interest in radical
exchange comes in so this was this a
movement that was started by gone while
a couple of years ago when he wrote this
a radical markets book and he advanced
some of his proposals like harberger
taxes and a quadratic voting were the
ones that are hand of them
popular and the and of the core and of
idea behind the ideas basically as like
let's creates structures of kind of
norms and incentives that try to have
the best properties that we can get out
of markets but do you do so without like
basically economically breaking in the
way that we know and if existing
property right systems do it once you
enter a world where kind of everything
that you build just inherently affects
millions of people well this is this is
an interesting perspective you of course
are famous for implementing this
aetherium protocol but before we ever
get to computer protocols there are sort
of legal and structural protocols that
we impose upon ourselves in the form of
government and markets that are
subordinate to government and there's a
weird way in which you may start a
process by which you write down rules
for how a society should function but
once those rules are written down you
may discover all sorts of unintended
properties of that rule set and there's
a real question can we actually unhook
ourselves from the killer app that is
capitalism or American democracy and if
we start to realize that that app is
running out of control
I guess in for and of myself as a enough
social technologist and I definitely
don't think that we should be kind of
overturning entire countries with the
new mechanisms overnight
I think oh and I was insinuating oh
definitely I think like that's like
figuring out how to kind of solve like
grand problems if Humanity is a
long-term goal but I mean short-term
goals are there is nothing there's
little things that we can make better
right so I and this is actually part of
why I find a cryptocurrency and
blockchains interesting because they are
in a lot of ways this ideal ground for
its economic experimentation or
different types right so like to give
one concrete example in in so one of the
ideas that go on while and myself have
come up with and are pushing forward is
something called quadratic funding and
the way that quadratic funding works is
roughly this right so you have a central
kind of pool of funding and you could
imagine this coming from a government
you could imagine this coming from
wealthy donors you could imagine it just
in being put together by some like
crypto economic protocol it could come
from anywhere and then you allow people
to basically set up projects and you
know what people say I have a project
here is something that I'm doing and if
you like this then you can donate to me
and give what people donate to projects
and then the core of the mechanism is
basically that if there is a projects
and multiple people donate to so there's
some projects you donate to it and
someone else donates to it as well then
your donation doesn't just benefit you
it also benefits the other person and
the other person's donation doesn't just
benefit them it also benefits you and so
to kind of counteracts that kind of
market failure the mechanism basically
says well we're gonna multiply the
effect of your donation by two and
multiply the effect of the other
person's donation by two and so now both
of your incentives are kind of aligned
with the whole and you extend this
mechanism so instead of supporting two
people it supports an arbitrary number
of people and you kind of calculate
these subsidies across all possible
pairs of people and what you get is this
formula that basically says you know
what people donate to different projects
you look at how many people donated and
how much money you've donated and based
on this from the central pool of funding
you give this extra subsidy and so it
basically is like a market for public
goods right and in the etherium
ecosystem there is something called that
get coin grants where we've basically
started like trying to use this
mechanism to fund public goods inside
the etherium ecosystem right so this
could be implementations of the etherium
protocol it could be scaling solutions
it could
be wallets it could be educational
resources and we've had a enough test
around recently with about and if
$200,000 in this central matching pool
and it recently finished and you can go
to a get coin dot Co slash grants to see
the results and we got contributions
from hundreds of people and the results
that gave were actually pretty
reasonable so in tests yeah and and so I
think if Tyrion can have a lot of value
is and just being a test net bed for and
decentralized governance and
decentralized public good finding
infrastructure of this kind well I think
that that's fascinating I guess one of
the ways in which I would understand
that is you know when my wife who's an
economist and I talk about this stuff we
often talk about a market democracy has
these two voting systems one is one
dollar one vote and the other is one
person one vote
theoretically anyway even if that's
honor only in the eye and like liberal
democracy does this horrible thing of
like treating these s opposite poles
where something is either one or the
other and they're and they're often
fighting each other one really
everything's a spectrum and I like that
a lot I mean an another thing that we've
been discussing recently and this again
is sort of drink with with Pia Milani is
thinking about the Chicago approximation
you've got some reality that's
incredibly nonlinear and complicated and
then weirdly yeah in a one of these
famous instances where the map is not
the territory you take this incredibly
simplified world where agents have this
properties you can't even believe you
would ascribe to a human being where you
thought Homo economicus and you it's
perfectly rational and it it has all of
these characteristics like an automaton
that only makes rational decisions and
then you impose that like through law
and economics programs and suddenly
you've distorted your society by taking
the map as the territory so seriously
that you don't realize that you're
destroying something and distorting yeah
no that's definitely a I think it's a
social it's one approximation
and you mean we're never going to have
approximations that are perfect because
the world is just so we're glad to hear
that yeah and the world is just so
complicated and so even rapidly changing
in the 21st century like aprox in all
approximations are bullshit but like you
have to find a couple of good ones that
work reasonably well and make progress
for us and I think that one of the
things that's unfairly done to
cryptocurrencies is that we expect them
to solve all of the problems that
already cropped up yes in our forms of
governance and our forms of currency in
exchange in court systems and that what
we should be asking of them is to be
improvements or to augment mm-hmm
already existing systems now one of the
odd things about governance is we could
view you as in some sense starting a
rival virtual country that has a legal
system because the etherium I don't know
what to call it Network platform
protocol yeah rolls coins and it has the
right to reassign those coins and not
only that but it has a stand-in for the
legal system in the form of what are
called smart contracts mm-hmm
normally a we have this concept in
governance I guess it goes back to Weber
that a government is supposed to be a
monopoly on violence which is an odd
definition that you recover the concept
of government from monopolizing violence
and then you you sort of unearth and and
unpack all of the features of government
from that one generating function in
some sense a cryptocurrency and smart
contracts derive from math rather than
violence they derive from math and
social consensus right I love the fact
that I was gonna get to that but yeah I
know I guess this is important right
because like for example you know you
have the Bitcoin blockchain and then you
have the litecoin blockchain which
operates under ik almost exactly the set
at the same set of rules as the Bitcoin
blockchain
and yet the Bitcoin blockchain has a
hundred million dollar market cap and
the white coin blockchain has a three
billion dollar market cap or something
like that and much less usage so
like blog Chin's are definitely not just
math and technology math and technology
are the substrate and maybe in the same
way that the military is like the
substrate of keeping a country together
but that there including police force
yeah exactly but like there the
substrate but they're not the country
right the country is the community well
and this goes to what I would love to
get into you with love to get into with
you which is the way in which different
utopian dreams collide in the space of
cryptocurrencies so for example there
are some dreams that may sound more like
what I assume you may be active in the
effective altruism community is that a
possibility
yeah which tries to figure how to do the
most good to do good efficiently rather
than sanctimoniously there are other
people who have this idea of I just want
to retreat from other human beings and I
want to be left alone it want to be
taxed I don't to be told what to do very
strong libertarian perspective sometimes
those people are the same people there's
two kinds of libertarians there's well
there's many ways that's what Albert
Aaron's is the two kinds but like
there's the leave me alone type and then
there's the kind of conquer the world
type right the kind that kind of
relishes seeing fiat currencies be
destroyed and replaced by Bitcoin and
it's kind of you know creating a
thousand a year kind of reign of sound
money that I you know I mean I generally
have this kind of instincts that like
when someone says that like we should
impose a lot of short-term disruption
and harm on the entire world for the
sake of some nebulous a long term gain
that's something to be skeptical of but
so I'm not gonna rely on the word
skeptical mmm-hmm you're using an
extreme form of understatement yeah yeah
and so I mean I'm definitely not in in
the camp that had if actively relishes
like fiat currency is being destroyed
but meanders and I definitely don't
think that all bitcoiners do it like
there is some that do see it as
and of a something that's supposed to
coexist and something that's supposed to
provide a check and balance against the
government's monopoly on issuing money
without replacing it entirely so you
know there are there's definitely enough
different visions within individual
communities there's different visions
between different communities you know
in it there's it's not just visions
about what cryptocurrencies should do to
the world it's also in your visions
about like what how cryptocurrencies
should work internally and what they
should do to each other so that in that
sense I guess like cryptocurrencies are
interesting in in ball chains not just
because of luck what they can do in the
world but also just as this and if
microcosm of the world all into
themselves like we talked about country
virtual countries but you know there's
there's many virtual countries now
there's over fourteen hundred on coin
market cap and they have some analog of
edgy you think of them as virtual
countries it's singing all models are
bullshit but some are useful but to the
extent that a country is a sensible
thing - yes yeah yeah so in that world
where we're dealing with often very
radical individualism and a very strong
sense that there is something wrong with
the coercive aspect of a government do
you worry that something that you have
given birth to may start to behave in
very different ways than you would ever
want definitely probably the closest
that we've seen to things like this
happening already would be the the
initial coin offering a boom in the 2017
and 2018 and like basically if what
happens and there was that people saw
that cryptocurrencies are something that
could potentially had a very high value
and so people started saying oh like I'm
raising money
anyone come and I give me 50 million
dollars and I'm gonna build a
cryptocurrency and I'm gonna make it
great and I'll turn your 50 million
dollars into 50 billion going guaranteed
and this like and like it's complicated
right because I mean on the one hand
like the possibility of a kind of
raising money and using it to fund
cryptocurrencies development like it's
it did a lot of good right began like in
general like the open source community
it's and it kind of acutely suffers from
this have public goods challenge that we
talked about because an open source
software is a very public good and like
we saw some very public and if splats
involving open source software being
under maintains like the CloudFlare and
if issues a couple years back we ran it
turned out that's an open ssl library it
was like really really under maintained
despite billions of dollars of value
depending on it and with
cryptocurrencies suddenly you could make
things that are completely open-source
that through coins do have a funding
mechanism and like you know this has
Mesnick massively accelerated the
development of many kinds of
cryptography is urinal which proofs and
peer-to-peer networking a lot of other
things but at this on the other hand
like it's also given rise to this kind
of speculation and in many cases the
projects turned out to be outright
fraudulent rage but uh it's a really
delicious and weird situation I haven't
asked you about it yet but you're I
presume that your net worth crashed a
great deal we got run up and then came
came back and were you happy in any way
about that relieved relieved yeah so
when the right at the top of the big
bubble like in December 2017 when YAG
Bitcoin was hitting 20,000 eath was
hitting 1,400 I made this tweet and a
series of tweets and that kind of became
somewhat famous one in the space where I
basically said the cryptocurrency space
has reached half a trillion dollars does
does it deserve it like do the things
that it's actually accomplished like
hold a candle to the promises that
market is ascribing to it and I mean the
subtext of my answer is not yet and that
was proven very right fairly quickly and
but you didn't short it did you
so the iana I did can you get and get
the etherium foundation to sell about
70,000 East like basically at the top
and that's doubled our runway now so it
was one good decision the heddle and
that had a lot of impacts but it did not
short I should say that I was weirdly
somewhat relieved as well I view that
the innovation of decentralized
transactions and the bid and you know
it's hard for me to say because I
actually I'm convinced that the
blockchain should be an intermediate
state and should not be the permanent
version of decentralized computing angry
okay but I thought that that was such an
amazing innovation that you could have a
locally enforced mechanism without a
centralized Authority but with a global
ledger unfair which which I see if it is
a point of intellectual failure that in
some sense you're mirroring the
transactions of the physical world so
for example for those listening at home
who don't have a visual here Vitalik has
several glass bottles next to him were
he to give one to me which he shouldn't
do right now but the idea would be that
it would no longer be in his space and
it would be in mine and that property of
Adams has been somewhat mirrored in
Bitcoin and blockchain and aetherium
transactions mean this is like the
concept of like money as a thing right
the and if the scarcity of the 21
million limit if I give you five coins I
have five lesson you have
five more right and so the idea is that
it's a what you're doing is you're
porting conservation laws into from the
physical layer into the logical layer
right and yeah and I guess and if to
some extent kind of reflects the kind of
very deeply enough Austrian economic
libertarian and origins of the the space
way better back in the end of 2009 to
2013 days you know I mean creating like
digital gold was pretty much the food an
additional payment system was the first
use case but I mean I definitely think
that like we can and should be thinking
about point systems that work in ways
other than money well I agree with that
and I also think that it isn't digital
gold because as the saying goes you know
gold or money has no stench and that the
blockchain is this bizarre difference
with the physical world and that it is a
distributed ledger that may be somewhat
anonymous but still gives the history
like if I hand you a dollar and you
don't have access to any particular
means of analyzing whose DNA is on that
dollar you have no idea where it's been
and these that is not that is violated
by the current block chain type
implementations yes so it isn't a
complete port of the physical world in a
digital but it is a an astounding one
and I guess I get very frustrated with
the economics questions like well what's
good what's it good for where's the
killer app I mean we have all of
whatever's left of human civilization to
figure out what this thing is meant to
do yeah and I'm not very worried that we
were not going to figure it out I mean
we're going to figure it out sooner or
later because a conservation law and
digital space is just too valuable is
that wrong
are you worried at all about the search
for like I I just hate this question you
know where's that where's the killer app
and I'm thinking chill out man this is
an astounding intellectual achievement
what is that wrong yeah and I think
there's definitely yeah and a long time
to go and I think you know the apps will
come you know there's the ones that are
coming right now are basically a kind of
financial but I think I mean that's kind
of true just in part because the finance
the existing financial system is just
like so ready and waiting there to be
disrupted event like in the long term
like there's there's is disrupted and
polite term for destroyed you choose but
I mean there's something interesting
here you're 25 years old
every bit of your adult life is post
2008 mm-hmm and to be 25 years old and
in charge of a financial ecosystem to
the extent that anyone is in charge of
aetherium and I don't want to claim that
you are sitting there running and making
all these decisions that's an astounding
thing that that this has fallen to
somebody who whose adult life has post
the crash hmm do you think about that at
all that you don't have the same
associations the rest of us do with
markets when they were claimed to be
working well like during the during the
era of the Great Moderation supposedly
when volatility was banished yeah 13 12
right so one thing that I had if when we
realized the recently that I found
interesting is that there like there
aren't kind of two tribes here there's
three tribes right and what I mean by
this is that there's the tribe that says
markets are great and there's the tribe
that says markets are bad and like we
should move to more things that look
like political mechanisms but then if
you look at kind of the zeitgeist that's
kind of fairly popular in the
cryptocurrencies space definitely even
still now to a big extent it's that
markets are great but the thing that
existed and exists like isn't markets
and
so I guess like there's people who are
pro market and who see kind of the
existing financial system as being that
and there's people who are pro marketed
receive the existing financial system as
being like yet another one of the
perversions of that that needs to be
overcome well it's odd because I would
love to fix our democracy I'd love to
fix our markets but I am I have to say I
believe that I have grown up in a
approximately 50 year bubble which the
Silent Generation and then the boomers
presided over and my own read is that
because of their inability to figure out
sufficient innovation to take over from
the previously innovative system that
the world of human expertise has been
almost completely contaminated by
special pleading and political economy
so that many of us who don't have a
particularly Austrian or libertarian
bent are just sick to death of being
lied to by people claim to be Nobel
laureates in economics yep
do you have any emotional connection do
you hmm
like I feel like I'm lied to about
almost almost you know the doctors are
lying the lawyers are lying the
accountants are lying
the extraction companies are a lying and
it's not because of a million different
reasons it's because growth ran out and
our whole society is predicated on a
need for economic growth ya know there's
definitely and of things that are that
have changed in us an assess them that's
just not keeping up and doesn't and
doesn't understand that there is such a
thing as keeping up and it's like hmm
so like one like that even when talks
about this right like he talks about
kind of the mortgage markets as social
technology mentality versus the like
basically end of history mentality and
like the way that I and I definitely saw
this kind of zeitgeist ten years ago
that said kind of even more broadly than
like markets versus other mechanisms
that's like things are 80% efficient and
lots of work to make them 95 percent
efficient whereas the the thing that's
really going on is that things are three
percent efficient and we should work
hard on making them six percent
efficient like if you kind of move away
from the narrow context of like I'm I
have something to sell when you have
something to buy which is pretty well
optimized already then there's lots of
these and very big things that are
happening that have just completely been
missed and in technology and if Network
effects and all and just generally kind
of migrating from atoms to bits are
definitely all a big part of it so let's
talk about something that's a little bit
funny which is if your start to replace
government as we were talking about it
and you see it as a monopoly on violence
you notice that very often there there's
a very funny role played by organized
crime and of course when we think about
organized crime we tend to get
emotionally excited by it for whatever
reason we make lots of movies about it
it occupies the mind is something
terrifying and alluring
and there's sort of two weird aspects to
organized crime one of which is violence
as a contract enforcement mechanism in
other words you're you're gambling so
you don't have access to the regular
court system now you have a gambling
debt and so just the way our government
would put you in jail if you you know
started doing things you couldn't
fulfill all of your obligations and you
were doing harm to lots of people you
couldn't be stopped organized crime has
to do something can't maintain jails you
know so it can put the hurt on somebody
for means of contract enforcement so
it's it's not looking to do violent
things it's looking to run illegal
businesses
for which there's demand yeah and then
it has a problem of enforcement then
there's another part of it which is
violence as the product so for example
extortion be shame if anything were to
happen to this lovely business that
you're running is a veiled threat pay us
or we're gonna do harm to your business
or you know contract killings and the
like yeah are you worried that
effectively by introducing parallel
structures both in the form of currency
and in the form of contracts smart
contracts that are the cynic wanna and I
guess of the difference between Bitcoin
and aetherium right that the killer app
that is most likely to happen while the
technology is still clunky and
cumbersome and difficult is in the
parallel space that either you are going
to replace organized crime as a place to
do contractual business outside of the
normal scope which could be a benefit
because organized crime still exists and
is a bad thing because it uses violence
and you would use math and in place of
it or that it could actually be used to
facilitate violence by you know using
let's say prediction markets or
something else to induce people to
commit crimes where the committer the
committer of violence has unusual
information about where the violence
will be committed and therefore can
profit from it it's definitely a worry
that have I in make lots of people in
the crypt of space I've had since the
beginning though I do feel like at least
so far I've been surprised like it feels
like a less avetis happens than we had
expected the thing now what do you what
accounts for the idea that something
that can be dreamt has mostly not
occurred yes I definitely have a yeah
maybe it's a great thing about humans
that we didn't realize that we're not
nearly the horrible people we thought
and I definitely have a couple of
theories about this so one of those
theories is
like basically a lot of things that
people do and especially a lot of things
that people do in the InfoSphere because
like public goods are chronically
underfunded and all that rely really
heavily on goodwill and so you know you
have goodwill that if someone if you pay
someone to write some piece piece of
software for your website it's not going
to include some blog oh yeah some bug
that'll steal people's money or tell the
FBI where you are that you if you create
a system for the enforcing agreements
that they'll actually get enforced then
even like on internet forums they depend
on kind of a lot of volunteer labor for
just things like moderation and if you
create a group that just goes like
fundamentally against like the vast
majority of people's values then it's
just gonna be hard to find volunteer
effort for that sort of thing and like
this so that's probably the big the big
reason I think why ik so far we don't
really see you kind of you know
complicated like decentralized structure
is being created to facilitate like
black black markets for killing people
and so forth because let's start off
with something more mundane like a
numbers racket right so a numbers racket
would probably be a much simpler
application so what do you mean by
numbers racket here well it's something
that takes the place of a lottery where
some let's say some naturally occurring
number that would be printed in a
newspaper and presumably nobody has the
influence over what number gets printed
right constitutes the lotto draw
lotteries have existed on watching since
the beginning yeah even there's
definitely been this kind of sub
community if people that created these
kind of provably faire Ponzi contracts
where and we have a smart contracts and
you can throw money in and as soon as if
you're the n's person just throw money
and as soon as soon as to end people
throw money and you get like 1.9 the
back or something like that and like
this was just a fun
games that people have made and
participated in even fully knowing what
the economic some of the thing are so
yeah in thing things like that have
definitely happened so I don't like
though in gambling is the sort of thing
that like there isn't like there isn't
this kind of $9.99 percent plus
consensus that it's really horrible and
evil right because like on the one hand
like lots of people want abandoned but
on the other hand people do it and it's
something that I think people see
negative consequences of but at the same
time it's something is something that
people participate in a little joy
whereas the I mean if extremely bad
stuff like that's there's definitely
this kind of this kind of barrier
between kind of things that are edgy
versus things that are just so far over
the edge and for things that are and if
so so far over the edge like it is yeah
even with smart contracts and even with
all those things it's still hard to
coordinate those structures and I think
like the blockchain like the blockchains
inability to directly read facts about
the real world could even be a saving
grace here because like because a
blockchain can't directly read like
whether or not something in the real
world happened it basically me and said
if you want to have some application
whether a prediction market or something
else that does okay so can we say a
little bit more about the proud the
intellectual problem that you're you're
in touching
so the idea is that there may be
something that's very perceptible to us
hmm about the real world but we might
naively think well the computer should
be able to tell whether that happened
right or it didn't happen and that
that's a surprisingly difficult thing to
code up reliably so that the interface
between the world of bits and bytes in
the world of otherwise physical reality
which often we don't realize we're
thinking about subjectively hmm that
it's hard to
maintain that interface so that the way
in which the things that have happened
in the real world can be definitely
agreed upon without us any kind of
adjudication inside of the digital right
yeah so no I don't know how to say that
well block chains are an a fundamentally
programmatic medium all they see is data
that gets fed into them and what they
can compute as a result of that data and
so if you wants to create a smart
contract that says if someone figures
out how to what the prime factors have a
big number or pay them a reward you can
do that because prime prime factors are
something that you can multiply together
and verify but if he wants to have a
smart contract that says if there's a
hurricane and in Srilanka then pay five
hundred bucks then like you can't do
that on the watch in itself because like
computer code has no idea what
hurricanes are it has no idea what's
real and is nobody but in that case
could have a designation that you know
that the National correct you can you
can get data from third party sources
and this is the thing that B else turns
it into data exactly this is the the
thing that a lot of applications are
doing but the thing that's important to
keep in mind is that as soon as you do
that a guru or smart contractor has no
longer fully trust us right right so
there's this concept which is like a
utopian concept of a trustless legal
system so that you don't have the
messiness of humans anywhere in the
system and you can have complete faith
and confidence in the contract that
you've struck yeah right and like
outside of fruit like basically giving
bounties for solving math problems so I
gets not something that you can 100%
achieve so I can't necessarily ensure my
vacation that if if I go all the way to
Argentina and the weather is terrible it
pays out because we can't agree what
terrible weather is right like you can
create structures bit made out of
individual participants they can try to
and have aligned incentives to get
people to kind of give to give correct
results so and you can have complicated
and if
interruptions involving people giving
different answers and policing each
other and rewarding people who give the
same answer that other people have
committed to and things like this but
like you can only try to approach the
had like the idea of kind of correct
truth like you can never 100% reach it
now you started aetherium in 2014-2015
um started started end of 2013 I mean it
watched in 2015
okay would you say let's use launch date
as an artificial sure date would you say
you are more or less excited
emotionally hmm then you were when it
started you've now been through so
you've logged some miles here hmm I
definitely definitely stay excited I
worked I think the main difference is
kind of more like definitely a kinda
excited in the sense of like four years
well definite and like I kind of as
opposed to indefinite like four years
yeah four years ago was about like hey
let's make this platform to kind of try
really a bunch of really cool things we
have no idea what's gonna happen and
let's just stick it out there and now
like we know things about things and
people are already doing we know things
about things that people wants to do on
weekends we'll also know more about Nick
what the limitations are and so instead
of just being this kind of extremely
fuzzy dream of like let's stick smart
contracts and algorithms and kind of
trust us if I everything right it's
something that's kind of both more
moderate but also kind of more like
seeming much more like it I like it
actually has a big chance of kind of
transforming the world and of precisely
because that's when moderated to some
extent so you more if I gave you a false
three choices and by the way smart
people always hate these things so feel
free to break the model if I gave you a
choice between saying are you mostly
excited about
the technology and the amount of
innovation are you mostly excited about
the business opportunities for yourself
or are you mostly excited about the way
in which this could transform human life
would you be that would that be an easy
call or would you say I reject that
decision tree some mix over the first
and the third mm no I just like the
framing of business opportunities is
definitely kind of never ik like this is
weird I mean the despite and it even I
get the sense that you don't love money
enough yeah this is true
okay hmm I mean it's weird because I for
a long time you have a lot of it yeah
well I have a lot of it and it's also
even weirder because I like for a long
time I subscribed so this kind of branch
of economics that basically says that
like love of money is like the best
motivation for B vote for people to have
an Randian um well in I'd say in that
area but it's but I don't get that I'll
be honest I just don't get that vibe
right I mean there's I've definitely
kind of shifted a lot over the years I
think my experience even within the
crypto space itself has kind of trend
and given me a lot of new information to
work with more like the this basically
and then this goes back to this kind of
cryptocurrencies as a microcosm of wider
society thing right like if you're like
basically any like any movements
regardless of like what what the
movement is for or what its goals are to
be succeed it needs to be sufficiently
big and once something is sufficiently
big it needs to have internal structure
to a coordinated energy of its
objectives which means that it suffers
from governance issues it suffers from
public goods the issue is it suffers
from conflicts with adjacent movements
and suffers from conflicts between its
own values and its and its own desire to
succeed and so on and so forth and like
it needs to
come up with ways to answer like
basically almost the same kinds of hard
problems at the world as a whole is
working on well you know it's
interesting when I look at this sort of
world of people maybe had an epicenter
in the Bay Area though I think it's less
true now we're trying to figure out what
is the future and how do we get there
there's a very clear sense that people's
creativity and their intelligence is
correlated with their financial success
but it's not very tight and so there's
like an embarrassment that well that
person is super amazing and then mm-hmm
not doing all that well this person
somehow metabolizing amend this amount
this is something that I've definitely
have realized just from one of my
travels like I've interacted with a lot
of kind of super famous people in
different kinds of positions which
includes like some world leaders and
includes some kind of leaders of like
fields in cryptography and it in you
realize that like people in these
positions they are impressive but
they're not like super amazing godlike
impressive right something tomorrow some
of them are but then there's also super
amazing godlike impressive people that
just like don't get written get that
much shit I don't know what I'm trying
to get at I think about like if you hang
around with musicians very often you'll
have some buddies a super famous
musician saying you want to who's really
good and they'll tell you some of you've
never heard of a musician's musician
exactly this yes right and so you know
if I if I gave the name of people who
are famous for being let's say
physicists they're very often the people
on television as physicists mm-hmm but
they would all point to some guy who
doesn't give a lot of interviews and say
well that's the top guy exactly like
basically the social status like is
predicted by confidence multiplied by
like basically publicity skill and
that's half correlated with competence
for obvious reasons right like those
people also know the people that have
the real confidence and that's one of
the things that I've always found really
interesting about people who have this
diehard belief that markets produce
justice which is I do think that success
in markets is somewhat correlated or has
been with things like productivity but
it's also correlated sometimes with how
predatory somebody can be or you know
how lucky they happen to be at a
particular moment and one of the
questions that I have is if you're
really interested in innovation which is
what I sort of pick up is you know the
main things how does something like
aetherium give us a possibility to
revitalize innovation after what many of
us consider a period of relative
stagnancy outside of the areas of
computation communication which
everybody knows have exploded hmm do you
think about how if cerium can mediate a
new Renaissance a new generative age
about it a little bit definitely and I
think I mean there's an of etherium as a
platform for experiments in governance
and public goods funding is one thing I
mentioned and education is another thing
that I end of talk about in the end
obviously we do I mean I have a lot of
these blog posts on Vitalik dossier in
other forums and like they're one of the
big challenges that a for example is
that like for in and if internet
educational resources in general there's
basically two kinds right there's like
papers and I Wikipedia and like
basically things that are technically
accurate but they're just not core ibly
not understand understandable at all and
we should not be forcing people to even
try reading them and then there's pop
side literature which is very accessible
but it's often just actively wrong in
really horrible ways and okay I
personally even before a theorem like I
did Bitcoin magazine for example like
I've always tried
to find this kind of middle gap this way
to explain can take concepts that are
technical and if expand them to a bride
a broader audience so they are more
accessible and like this to me has been
important in part because like I view
accessibility of information about the
technology as a precondition for even
the decentralization of the space like
if the thing technically runs on fifty
thousand computers but only forty two
people know how it works and your
decentralization indexes and fifty
thousand it's 42 you know and so there's
a very nice point yeah and so trying to
kind of improve like even how we in the
etherium community and if work on
innovation internally but so those are
kind of things that and if that happened
in blockchains as a novella as a lab for
trying out new things kind of first for
the blockchain space and then
potentially export it to other things
and then we can also look at head of
block chains as something that can be
used to improve and create better
institutions so like one of the etherium
foundations researchers vlad sam fear he
actually got into aetherium because he
was looking at how to improve academic
publishing and like he saw things like
you know the existing peer review
mechanisms and how they were just a very
flawed in a bunch of ways and he thought
that like hey here's potentially apply
form that we could use to build
something that does better and like
that's one of his core interests and why
he is even continuing to work on the
technology you know i hadn't understood
how insiders viewed peer review in an
academic context until he finance
professor got drunk at a party and said
you know that guy who's harassing you in
your research in finance you don't know
why he's doing i said well why do you
think he's doing so i know he says we've
created a system where our fees are
sky-high to consult and we do this by
making the number of professors in our
field small by controlling peer review
and so that effectively we are at
conspiracy in restraint like this guy's
just telling me straight out that this
is a gating function to keep their
consulting fees high and that this guy
is gonna do everything that they tell
him to do because otherwise he can't
come into the club and charge these
rates that sounds about right
right so that one of the app another
killer application so you have one
potential suite of applications which
have to do with facilitating illegality
some of that might regard result in net
reduction of harm because you could
replace violence with math yes on the
other hand a place where you could have
a really positive effect is political
economy where by removing the human
ability to act badly you effectively
create a much fairer more representative
world exactly you know what do we do so
you have an interest in in the two
fields I find Wikipedia can't explain to
any normal human being our theoretical
math and physics even biology you can
sort of guess what's going on because
you have something concrete but it's
even biology like you gotta learn math
the deeply crockett because otherwise
you're just memorizing like names of
chemicals well but you could my here I
have a PhD in math if I try to read a
math paper one or two fields over from
my own field right I will do less well
with it than if I read a biology paper
and even though I've taken no class in
biology that sounds right yeah yeah like
there's a difference between the level
of math that you have to know it's you
just because it's importance for you as
a philosopher and then and look that's
about the level of math that I think you
need even to tip you go to biology to be
good at economics to be good at a lot of
things right it's understanding like
principles even things like for example
if you have a trade-off between x and y
and right now you're optimizing entirely
for x and it's a smooth curve
then if he wants a little bit of Y then
you can get your first bit of Y at
almost like zero cost of X right and
that's just a prop like it's a property
of continuous functions that like from
the maximum of the derivative starts at
zero you know if you kind of just deeply
kind of mentally grok about like a
couple hundred of these facts to see
where you're deeply kind of mentally
grow up like how to walk then like you
get a lot but then from there there's
also like the frontiers and often I mean
the frontiers were most important well
so here's a weird thing I don't know how
to bring up when I try to understand
crypto as a space
I'm always confronted by how incredibly
Byzantine and impossible it is to
understand all of the acronyms all of
the sub pieces of history I mean it's an
incredibly fragmented experience in
which I spend a long period of time just
feeling moronic isn't it odd that like
etherium itself suffers from this this
problem it's hard to know what's going
on yeah it's definitely something that
we wants to fix so if I mean if you ever
have suggestions on like what
specifically we could make more
understandable I'm always happy to hear
those fantastic now one thing that I
think is really interesting is this
episode that occurred in the etherium
space in which you are faced with a very
serious question of leadership having to
do with an emergency that you could have
either allowed to follow the rules that
had been previously specified in some
sense or could where you could interject
a certain amount of human intervention
but thereby letting people know that
this was to some extent not mediated
only by rules and computers can you can
you say a little bit about this famous
incident and sure so in 2016 there was
this smart contract that a group called
salokya launched called the dao and do
stands for a decentralized autonomous
organization and said to her my team
with about three years before and it
basically means that maybe you can have
a smart contract to this computer
program that controls digital assets and
if encode a set of rules for an
organization and like you can use this
kind of smart contract basically as a
replacement for things like companies
and so some I could decide to launch a
Dao and their Dao was intended to be
basically a decentralized to BC fund so
people could apply the Dao would vote on
which projects were worth investing in
so leaderless rule-based yeah and
virtual exactly it was the hit hit all
the cypherpunk notes that they're in the
right place okay and the thing launched
and we were all expecting it
during its kind of initial fundraising
phase which was also like an open public
blockchain process and to maybe get five
million dollars but then it got five and
it got ten and I got twenty I got 50 and
100 and then the price of youth went up
and it got 200 and then when I was
sitting at AF friends was it all
alarming that it was so successful
after the 50 mark I definitely have
switched from excitement's to deep
apprehension but you know it's a
contract if you lid on that that you
were feeling that way a bit okay yeah so
on a June 17 2016 and when I was in
Shanghai at a a friend's apartment and
it was about fifteen thirty something in
the afternoon I saw a message in one of
the Skype chats that it was that I was
in and someone basically was saying hey
guys look at the Dow it seems like
there's some money coming out of it and
so I checked on the public black
Explorer on the blockchain and I saw oh
look they it seems like about two
million dollar has actually already been
removed from the Dow and more ethos and
of slowly being drained over time and so
I pinged the core developers and I asked
hey is this normal and
at first I was thinking okay the
alternative is unthinkable there has to
be a reasonable explanation for this
and so you were locked into some sort of
denial for the beginning yes and the
developers looked at it and over the
next half-hour as more and more people
came online and started chattering with
each other it became clear that the
unthinkable has actually happened
and I actually burned about 20 of my own
II like basically just tossing the
ethereum blockchain in itself and just
spamming it with transactions to try to
and have slowed the attacker I've seen
is denial of service yeah yeah just spam
the blockchain with transact not all of
my listeners will know the terms okay so
that the attackers transactions could
not get in as quickly because the
attackers transact the attacker could
only withdraw something like a couple
hundred eath with every transaction so
it was a slow process like in the hopes
that the developers would find some way
to play with a little intentional
inefficiency or was just that it was it
was not intentional so in some weird way
the inefficiency was a good yes it gets
even weirder there was an even bigger
and efficiency that would that would
prove to be an even better thing so but
then the developers however did not find
a way to plug the hole but the attacker
voluntarily stopped after stealing about
4 million eath from the dough but in any
case the this is a second in efficiency
right voluntarily stopped yeah it was a
request made no no as in the attacker
just stopped okay and end so here's the
second and bigger in efficiency
the money that was the attacker took out
the four million es it did not go into
the attackers wallet immediately instead
it went into a child smart contract and
only after 35 days could the attacker
actually take that money out and this
was child smart contract you mean a
separate smart contract that was created
through a function call of the main Dao
smart contract okay so this was also not
intended right it was just like a random
quirk of this of fate that
there was this big bug that was the
biggest smart contract theft in history
up until that point and it put the money
into this convenient box where just stay
conveniently locked for 35 days where
everyone could stare and look at it oh
yeah and the soon after this there were
calls happening between core developers
and the proposal to remedy the situation
with a blockchain fork I came into play
right so basically what happened here is
the it was a blockchain fork an
emotional issue for this community yeah
so why is it so what I guess first of
all what is it exactly so explain what
what would happen so in general a
blockchain for Kisan normal process
right you have an upgrade and the
developers of the etherium clients
implement code that basically says after
block number four three seven zero zero
zero zero stop processing blocks
according to the old rules start
processing blocks according to the new
rules which have extra features attached
and your blocks are just said packages
of transactions yeah okay and bees and
so ever before this sub I know these
code patches are formally proposed there
is this month-long period of mini month
long period of deliberation we are
changes or proposed people discuss them
people talk about them and generally
it's agreed that these changes are good
and so people just go and download the
code and because everyone's downloaded
the code the block chain after block
four three seven zero zero zero zero
follows these difference in better it's
a very warm and very human process yeah
called logic of a machine exactly
elements and so the dal fork it was also
a fork it was also a code change
implemented by the developers of the
clients that is it was pushed out
through a new version of the different
clients that people could download and
users went ahead and voluntarily
downloaded it and it would basically
change the rules of the blockchain
except instead of changing them for a
permanent
it would only do what a single one time
change and the single one time change
basically said during block one one nine
two zero zero zero zero before
processing any transactions take the
ether that stuck in the this child
contract and move it into another
contract that could then basically
refund it all to the victims and so this
was a very kind of manual intervention
right it basically says like we all
agree it's a run code that just
irregularly takes this money and just
reassigns it so that's other thing so
the the it's very weird because you know
we always think in like a sci-fi movie
that some thing that you think is human
would rip off its mask and reveal itself
to be a computer and this is the reverse
exactly pewter face is ripped off
revealing humans behind this this
technological stack yes and I mean
ultimately like people talk about head
of blockchain immutability and like this
is this idea that basically you're not
supposed to do this sort of thing and
where does that supposed to come from
exactly it so like there's there's
definitely a sense in which it exists
technologically because like actually
pulling off one of these Forks is
incredibly hard and for example if it
was not the case that the money was
conveniently stuck there and one nice
little address for 35 days it would
basically not have been possible to do
it right because when as soon as you
announced this protocol change that says
we're gonna take money out of here put
it in there the attacker could just
moved the money from there to a
different address and basically we play
this cat-and-mouse game and the attacker
could win but sometimes there is this
possibility where you knew you up so we
can just like do these interventions and
you can just decide to stop writing this
code and start running this other code
and the only reason why this is not done
more frequently is basically because
their existing norms right in there
exist norms in the blockchain community
Avalon Zamfir the researcher I mentioned
before and if calls them a Szabo's Ally
and named after nick szabo and in mixed
sample actually just likes the moniker
suppose a lot like it is a pretty
accurate representation of kind of his
beliefs which is and the beliefs of many
in the crypto community which is
basically that like even though it
technically is code run by humans we
should act as though it is code not run
by humans and look because the
decisional gold right gold is not run by
humans gold is gold and so if we want to
make something that is a light gold then
even though we're unfortunately stuck
with this thing run by humans we should
watch try as hard as we can to pretend
it's not and like this was the ideology
of a lot of people in this space and the
dal fork very much went against this
ideology and so even though in my
opinion like having norms like you can't
just like go and edit whatever you want
is valuable but like when so such a
large fraction of the ecosystem is at
stake it's worth rethinking things but
like other people were and if even more
rigid in this regard and so there was
this kind of split in the community and
a portion of the community actually did
not download the updates right a portion
of the community did not download these
code patches and implement the fork and
they just said we will continue running
our own our old chain and the old chain
has since then been called aetherium
classic and it runs to this day this is
a fascinating civil war in essence yes
and what I get out of this is that
there's this very weird thing which is
that people get very attached to
ideologies and then they come to
understand why the simplistic version of
that ideology can't possibly work in a
warm human system I watched this it you
have you ever gone to this festival
called a femoral which is sort of
Burning Man on the water that was I was
part of it and I got invited to it but I
haven't had the chance to go yet so it's
kind of a libertarian Waterworld in the
Sacramento Delta and what was
interesting is is that one year in order
to come to the festival you had to have
a lecture and you had to agree that you
would receive the lecture because of
problems that had happened the previous
year and you realize that these
libertarians were being forced to invent
permanence and rather than just anarchy
you had to have some organized system
and so one of my questions is is that is
that dream of escape from the heavy hand
of government effectively not something
to be pursued inside of crypto space for
the most part because we realized that
it is going to require governance and
that we can't figure out a way to turn
this into a completely cold and
methodical process it depends on which
version of the dream you subscribe to I
think the if the version of the dream
you subscribe to is the dream that says
that we can finally use algorithms to I
basically completely eliminate humans
ability to interfere in things then like
if your goal is to seen that enforced
100% then like no you're not going to
get that if your dream is that you
dislike how governments have had
existing governments and monopolies and
violence have hegemony over this social
function of coordination and enforcing
structures of rules and you want there
to exist an alternative then like that's
something that we can talk about right
so I mean if if the dream is to augments
yes and I mean I'd argue that the block
chains have a very and if necessary role
now especially kind of given modern kind
of political trends work there basically
is no single traditional political body
that's accepted as trustworthy by the
entire world and it doesn't look like
there's going to be one but like if your
dream is to and if completely over
overturn things and have some simplistic
notion of digital property rights as the
only thing that governs behavior then
that's something that like you can try
for but you're not going to succeed let
me try something else with you that I'm
curious about you and I are both plugged
in to this weird alternate world that
thinks very differently and I had Andrew
yang
in that chair and you saw that episode
of the the point before some people call
this neuro divergence that this is a non
neurotypical world and i would say that
both you and i exhibit some indicia of
not thinking along standard lines the
thing that occurred to me is that you
brought up slight star codex which is
this website that is extremely
influential in our shared world mm-hmm
and i was thinking about the difference
between slate star codex and CNN in
terms of sense making
is there any way in which the etherium
world can create a counterweight so that
the neurodivergent can rest the
stranglehold that seemingly the
neurotypical institutional world is used
to have on sense making its scale like
is there a way of promoting another blog
in this world would be like less wrong
there particular thinkers that i think
of as being very important influential i
think you've given to our breda gray and
eliot sir you'd Caskey there's like this
very different world that isn't well
known and in part i view podcasting is
like pirate radio which is the phrase I
keep or some is that because you're
Russian yes what can we do potentially
using your technology to even the
playing field between corporate sense
making and this kind of home-brewed
sense making that seems to me to be of
an infinitely superior level hmm well
not infinitely but quite superior yeah
so I think like once again there's kind
of two aspects to kind of blockchain TM
that I think are a equally valuable here
one is the technology itself and then
the other is the existing community
around the technology and I mean with
the ticket with the technology itself I
mean you can try to like create and you
know institutions for
I could do even things like funding like
podcasts for example and like even like
things like this kind of get coin grants
quadratic voting for example it would be
a potentially a great way to kind of
funds media organizations that avoids
the pitfalls of both say a present-day
media which is funded by some
combination of a tree of like
advertising and horrible quick made
incentives and at the same time avoid
the pitfalls of like basically sent
accentually controlled media and create
a third alternative so and like it
doesn't even have to be quadratic voting
it could be some other kind of mechanism
for funding and ball chains could be
used as a base layer for that there's
also the end up watching of community as
a group of people who care about the
many of these kinds of ideas and I mean
even a lot of etherion people are
definitely and some weight star codecs
adjacent you know then I feel like I
have tried my best to kind of bring
these worlds together and get them to
talk to each other in means sometimes it
is a challenge because there's ways in
which they're similar and there's a lot
of people who are in both and there's
also ways in which they're sometimes
different but those those differences
can be a good thing yeah I guess I'm
concerned that in our we're coming up on
an election in the US and I view Fox
News in the New York Times and CNN is
like watching professional wrestling
it's got a very clear narrative
structure before the facts even come in
yeah this is this is actually one of the
things I've only really started noticing
maybe in the last like 1 to 2 years
think it's narratives are something that
I don't seem like you're there when
you're fully inside of them but once you
and have step outside and you start
seeing that Nick wait these people are
missing something and they're making
predictions that turn out to be
materially incorrect like yeah there's
no memory like there's no cost you
yeah you want to there's no
accountability at all and it's something
that you just actively start thinking
seeking out how to move beyond yeah you
know I think figuring out a better
funding model for media organizations in
general seems in some ways what I'm
concerned about is that something like
podcasting is almost a public good and
so absolutely a public good
well I'm advertising in the one thing
that ready to keep I call it the
business model of last resort yes and we
are going with an ad-supported model
because I don't want a disguise we were
somebody offered to endow the podcast
not not my employer and I decided
against it because I think what I really
want to do is to try to figure out how
to improve the business model we've
talked about a couple different
variations on advertising in order to
make sure that controversial but very
sensible and level-headed people can
weather the storm that the big problem
that I keep seeing is that advertisers
pull when there's a coordinated campaign
to say drop that program or else yes and
there's a a need for something like the
blockchain or smart contract to make
sure that you can't silence people who
are speaking decently just because
they've pissed off a very large activist
community right so do you see any way in
which the blockchain for example like I
might give up advertising if I could
figure out a way to fund not only this
program but allied programs so in 2011
when I was starting Bitcoin magazine I
well it started off with like with this
one anonymous person whose name I'll
never know who aside from Kiba his
internet handle and who was just paying
me five Bitcoin which back then was $4
per article to write articles for him
and I mean this was five times Oh lower
than a minimum wage but I loved it
because it was the higher highest wage
I've ever had
um and eventually despite paying me five
times less than minimum wage I'd keep
our ran out of money and like he's told
me hey maybe the coin week we all have
to shut down and I came up with this
business model that actually ended up
saving it for a few months and basically
saving it all the way until I got could
have poached my pick one magazine and
the business model is basically I write
two articles a week and we'll publish
the first paragraph of each article kind
of publicly and we'll say the rest of
these articles is kind of hidden for
ransom and here are some Bitcoin
addresses and if people can collectively
come together and pay 2.5 BTC to these
Bitcoin addresses everyone for everybody
yes yeah and it actually worked well and
it actually started raking in like much
more money than Kiba had paid before so
and it's not saying look that precise
totally gonna sleeve it's a clever it's
a clever exploit yeah exactly I like to
me more clever experiments as like what
smart contracts are all about so let's
try lots of different things and we're
gonna have come upon mmm some steps
forward that are interesting italic I'd
love to have you come back and talk to
us about other things at other points
but let me just close by asking you a
couple of questions about the mysterious
origins of decentralized computing the
blockchain and all of this stuff sure
what the hell why don't we know who's
Satoshi is at this point where Satoshi
si seemingly came up with the first
really viable version of this this idea
hmm
we can prove that yeah I guess those
those blocks have never transacted that
are their satoshis control one would
think you know and that's a very
mysterious origin story yeah it
surprises a lot of people does it
surprise you it does I mean it's I think
there's definitely not many people that
I have managed to stay anonymous and if
the rooh of that level of prominence
like even axilla roads the kind of first
big round of crypto anarchistic law
project on top of Bitcoin and like after
about two years Russell Birk got caught
and me and the tools for just continuing
to look at things that you say until
eventually you slip up and you use some
word word patterns that match like word
patterns that you used under your name
and then you correlate things like it's
difficult to get around and like I've
Unabomber got away with it for a long
time mmm the yeah you know but the
Citizens Committee to investigate the
FBI that pulled off this amazing heist
in 1971 so in Ted wrote his stuff in the
1970s right and that's also 1970 no
saying and now we have we have the
internet and everyone's stuff is on a
it's publicly available we have machine
learning we have statistical tools do
you think it's well known who's Satoshi
is within a group that doesn't want to
talk no so I in I think that I mean
there's high uncertainty about this but
I think that it's very likely that
excessive she has one person you think
he is one person yeah and there isn't
some like a very grand conspiracy big
Lou think you know Satoshi not that you
know who's Satoshi is but do you think I
think it's someone I know personal yeah
so if I had to pick one person and the
and I'm not asking you to out that you
can say if you know you'll say it it's a
it's not an uncommon opinion if I if I
had to bet my wife on one person health
any basically because in hell was around
in the early days he clearly understood
what was going on here clearly
participated since the beginning and he
also died at the exact time basically
that's where she disappeared and so
there's a lot of these kind of
coincidences in his favor but then he's
the one person I'd bet on if I had to
bet on someone but I'd also bet against
him when I gets well under fifty percent
so
pretty good caper yeah and there's
there's definitely a significant chance
that it's like someone who is still in
the in the crypto space somewhere that
I've met at some point or it could just
be someone we have never met and never
will hmm he's not a really good job like
even just kind of setting himself up as
this kind of perfect world she or they
yes yes and no yeah she she's really
like impressed a lot of people it's
pretty yeah I find it very inspiring one
of the great intellectual feats of our
time would have anonymous authorship and
the only story I know that's comparable
to that is this bizarre break-in story
where there was a woman I believe named
Judy Feingold who was determined to take
the secret to the grave
and the other people in the conspiracy
left the conspiracy after the statute of
limitations had run out and they started
talking and then her perspective was we
all agreed we were never gonna mention
who did it there's some desire usually
to get caught and an urge to purge yeah
well that does make it more likely
there's one person right conspiracies
get exponentially harder the more people
you add that's true
it's been fantastic having you here I
want to let you know that you're welcome
to come back and to talk about things
that are unrelated to aetherium and
blockchain and crypto because I actually
I have to say I found very inspiring
your attempt to use this platform to
rethink what can economics be repurposed
to do and I think that that's an
unheralded potential killer app for your
program thank you it's been it's it's
been good to be on here okay you've been
through the portal with Vitalik butyrin
thanks for joining us please remember to
subscribe wherever you listen to
podcasts and to check out our youtube
channel and to subscribe there and click
the bell for more episodes when they be
I'm available thanks for joining us
[Music]
[Music]