[Applause]
[Music]
but the question is okay we're losing
our minds but can we say anything more
about it and the reason that that video
of that apparently peaceful protests are
being hauled off I mean hauled out of a
crowd specifically because he's the one
talking that really looks like an
egregious violation of his First
Amendment rights and it's not the only
video that looks like this but what
struck me most was that I had not seen
them right I came to that video because
Sam Harris said something on his Twitter
feed about what is the meaning of these
videos in which apparently peaceful
protesters are addressed by the police
and I thought I haven't seen those
videos I've seen videos in which the
police are very aggressive but I also
know that the protesters are being very
aggressive what's he talking about
and so I went looking and I found videos
on Camille Foster's Twitter feed and I
looked at them and they were exactly as
described and I thought this is so
relevant at this moment that the fact
that I am NOT running into it is telling
us something and I think what it's
telling us is that Twitter's algorithm
whatever it is thinks I'm a conservative
because I say a lot of things about what
isn't right over on the left and it has
misunderstood me and also it thinks that
if you're conservative which you're not
but that if you were a conservative you
would be uninterested in seeing things
that confound your current views right
or maybe even to say that it thinks is
the mistake because what it is doing I
would suggest is it is simply feeding
people that which confirms what they
already believe and so here's my very
simple contention about some large
fraction of what is taking place at the
moment
everybody is plugged into an apparatus
that is sitting in between us the way
conversation used to and what it is
doing is it is feeding us things that
confirm what we actually believe much of
which is real but that in effect people
smart scientific people who know very
well that the right way to
carefully is to be falsification Asst to
look for things that disconfirm your
beliefs are being fed an overwhelmingly
verification ax stand that is causing
everybody to be dead sure they know
what's going on when very few of us have
any clue and one thing that is so
different about this moment than the
moment of 20 years ago or 40 years ago
is that we had editors and people have
complained about editors and the move
towards social media is seen by some as
a populist revolution in which anyone
can have voice but if you want to watch
fox news and also want to watch CNN you
know something about the editorial
biases of those networks and you can
choose to watch both and you know that
you are going to get still skewed still
edited still presumably biased but
versions of the biases and edits of
those perspective networks whereas on
Twitter if you follow a wide variety of
people as you and I do you follow I
follow Camille Foster and Sam Harris and
boy there's so many other people who
once you found this I went looking what
there are many people who I follow and I
don't follow thousands of people
specifically so that I can see what
these people are saying there are many
people whom you and I follow who have
been posting these videos and neither of
us we're seeing them that tells us that
this is not the same as being able to go
and decide I'm going to read the New
York Times and I'm going to read The
Wall Street Journal
I'm going to watch CNN and I'm going to
watch Fox it's not the same thing we
have had our choice taken away but we
have we are being given the appearance
that we have more choice than ever we
have the sense that we are correcting
for this but you have no idea how
quickly you have to swim upstream to
counteract the algorithm and so this is
having an absolutely the wildering
effect on us I think and for me the
iconic instance of this is Dave
Chappelle's new video right so I have
not seen it yet so it's titled 846 that
8 minutes and 46 seconds is what Derek
shawhans nee spent on
on George Floyd's neck and this piece is
not really a comedy piece and you know
Chappell talks about that I must say I
know you share my feelings about this
but I think Chappell is he's a he's a
genius and his genius extends to many
different things he's figured out a way
to to be authentic but to look through
the eyes of someone else and allow them
to see the authenticity of something
that they are predisposed not to see so
anyway there's no shortage of love and
gratitude for what he's delivered this
piece that he's put out very popular
piece retweeted by Joe Rogan very
enthusiastically Barry Weiss I think who
is punishing us for something I don't
know what but in any case the the
Chappelle piece is wrong and it's wrong
completely authentically and so anyway
in some sense no you're speaking there
presumably many of the people watching
have seen it or you know you you guys
have the luxury of stepping aside and
watching and I don't at the moment yeah
what what is wrong about it what I don't
I don't and I'm asking that out because
I've seen it and don't see anything
wrong but because I actually don't know
what's in it what's wrong with it is
that it doesn't take into account what
sam harris painstakingly goes through
which is that our intuitions about what
is going on have very little to do with
what the data suggests is going on and
so the point is now I want to be very
careful that people do not misinterpret
what I'm saying I think there's
something very real about this moment
and this protest and one of the things
that's driving me crazy is that the
message is so wrong the focus is so
wrong
that we do not understand that the
tremendous frustration that is boiling
over in our streets and frankly
threatening the Republic and maybe more
that that frustration is simply being
delivered with a false set of
labels and so we don't even know how to
interpret it so my point to you is that
Chapelle looks at the protest and he
says effectively you're goddamn right
right of course people are angry of
course they're angry and he talks about
some of these cases that we've seen on
video that just seems so upsetting right
but the problem is that those cases are
at best anecdotes and of course even if
those cases are exactly what we think
they are the fact that those cases may
not be disproportionate suggests that
race may not be playing the role that we
think it's play and does that mean that
black people are not perceiving some
sort of substantial obstacle that is
blocking progress that I would argue has
stalled progress no they are detecting
something and when you see somebody do
something egregious on videotape and you
feel this force holding you back and you
put two and two together and you say
those two things are the same thing
right you may not be right it may be
that those things have nothing to do
with each other
and as I have said before the visceral
anecdote will always be more powerful
than the dispassionate statistic right
and if we can take a non-racial example
I said in my talk how the magic trick is
done that a woman who's walking down the
street who takes some look that I give
her to be full of some kind of meaning
that she finds creepy doesn't know
whether it was actually a creepy look or
am I just awkward and I gave the guy who
walked down the street next to her the
same weird look right you can't tell if
all you have is an edit and so what we
have is an inherently an inherently
biased set it is much more interesting
in some sense when the thing matches
some narrative about some very powerful
force of racism that is alive and well
in the u.s. and you know what there is a
force of racism that is alive and well
in the u.s. but it's small right most
people are not encountering it every day
the number of you know one of the things
that Sam reveals is that actually in
2019 the number of police shootings
was at an all-time low the number of
killings by police in Los Angeles in
2019 was at an all-time low and so
there's something there's some question
about are we moving in the right
direction
are these things racially biased these
are questions that are addressed by
tools that we know now here's the crazy
thing what did we see this last week
those very tools are under attack shut
down stem Y is shut down stem marching
with some cartoonish presentation of the
role racism is playing in America
because if you have the tools then you
can test the claim so those who are
advancing false claims have an interest
in shutting down those tools shutting
down any claim that has been
demonstrated with them any doubt that
has been established and so well this
emerges in part I don't have the quote I
will I will paraphrase it and hopefully
I don't butcher it but the Audrey Lorde
quotation from I think it will have been
the 1970s in which she says you don't
you can't tear down the Masters house
with the Masters tools now which is a
ridiculous and disempowering message
actually as as so much of the material
in the message income coming across the
transom from these these movements these
so-called anti-racist movements are
often actually disempowering for exactly
the populations whom they are purporting
to try to raise up right and to the
extent that so my claim about Chappell
would be that he is he would present the
story as it really is if he could see it
but he is also subject to a world of
algorithms that have categorized him
some way and so somehow I think he's
missed the point
but he's still Dave Chappelle so in some
sense as much as I hate to see him
present something that I think is
incorrect it's also hopeful because
being Dave Chappelle he's capable of
seeing it right and so what would be
amazing is if there was a dialog in
which the point was
okay Dave we heard what you have to say
here's the counterpoint that would be a
remarkable dialogue ya know it certainly
would
[Music]