welcome to the stola the stoah is a
digital campfire where we go here and
dialogue about what matters most at the
night's edge what's happening now
let's talk more about why we're here and
what's going on so the Cova trolley I'm
going to share my well first I'm gonna
give you some explanation that I'm gonna
share a presentation we're gonna walk
through the presentation and I'm gonna
try to make this as accessible as
possible so the trolley problem is a
frequent moral device that is brought up
whenever you want to figure out if we
pick this path there's a consequence and
we pick this path there's a consequence
and both consequences are pretty
terrible so which one do you want to
suffer with the most basically this is
very important today not just for
philosophical reasons but also because
of the advent of AI so because of
artificial vision machine learning data
science those things fusing together is
creating scenarios where you have
self-driving cars where the car has to
make a split decision does it go one way
and wipe out a 70 year old white elderly
woman or does it go the other way and
then wipe out a 17 year old black female
what do you pick you can only pick one
way you're gonna accidentally tackle
someone here at high speed and that's
not gonna go well so what is the
criteria you're picking for your choice
I tend to think that that criteria is
ultimately going to be risk-based
economics as they're already calculated
in Lloyd's of London and other players
but what's happening now is we're seeing
the this moral trolley problem being
carted out in the kovat space without
formalizing it so there's this fun
little dichotomy that's forming in the
mimetic space where it's either well the
government has to intervene or it's it's
going to kill a lot of people but the
markets have to burn and other people
will say well the markets have to stay
alive otherwise the people are going to
starve so in either scenario you have a
really terrible outcome so what this
discussion is going to go down is it's
going to say well let's back up a bit
instead of picking one the other let's
look at this from an epistemological
standpoint and instead of trying to pick
one way or another and then rationalize
whatever body count you're willing to
rationalize let's instead
Edie say hey let's explore how these two
things feed back into each other how
does the population that's getting sick
affect the economy and how does the
economy improve the people getting sick
so let's look at that feedback loop
instead and so that's that's a
preference I'm going to now turn it over
to the screen share and we'll go from
there and I'll go through this one step
at a time and let me know if everyone
can see that okay a little laser making
sure if I can see it so this is the
little meme I found floating about the
internet and I realized that's kind of
funny and the implication of the meme is
that you're basically screwed no matter
what you pick you're more along the
lines of who do you want to sacrifice
first you want to trash the economy do
you want to trash a bunch of sick people
first and in either case they're both
getting trashed so I found this meme to
be a proper reflection of the actual
problem because of the symbiotic nature
the people are the economy and the
economy feeds back on people so because
of that complicated nature what is the
economy what it what are what is kovat
even what it what are the people what
are what are all these actors in this
play here I let's start with you know
let's start with the train which is
kovat what is it right you might think
you know something about it you might
know a little bit about the disease you
might have heard that it's kind of like
aids and it has this cytokine storm sort
of effect you might have heard a lot of
people are getting infected with it but
it accumulates you've heard a lot you've
heard other people say it's fake I'm
sure you've come across the entire
spectrum of possibilities here so
whatever you think you know about it you
actually don't unless you were there and
even if you were a lab person sitting
there under the microscope poking and
prodding this thing and you've or you're
one of the team of the potential bio
weapon engineers who made this thing
even then you still don't even know what
this thing is and there's a good chance
that we'll never know what this thing is
now why is that
these two statements are pretty
controversial to say because we have a
huge amount of faith in a concept of
science the idea that if we put anything
under the scrutiny we'll figure out all
kinds of details about it and we'll come
up with some good enough conclusions you
don't have to figure out you know
everything down to the particle we'll
figure out what's pragmatic for us and
our purposes and our needs and that's
that's a lot of how we associate the
concept of knowing something and then
pragmatically extracting usefulness from
that knowledge and that's kind of how
we're already trained to go so when I
but when I pop these two statements in
front of you and I say you don't know
anything about it and you'll never know
what it is there's probably like the
some of you might be having a sort of a
violent reaction to that to a degree but
I'm not here to tempt you and troll you
into that type of reaction what I'm
saying is that the concept here is
knowledge right to know something
meaning to have a definite understanding
and capacity of what this thing is
unless anyone here is a virologist then
there's a good chance no one's really
gonna know anything about it and that's
okay
that is okay it usually were shunned and
we're told you can't you have to know
everything because we're smart we're an
advanced civilization so you have to
know everything but it's okay to not
know it's completely perfect it's it's
perfectly normal
we're humans which three pounds of meat
up here right there's more going on in
the universe then then we have the brain
capacity for and that's okay because we
have another thing that we do and that's
called belief and belief isn't another
is a very important part of the
cognitive process so whatever you
believe about kovat nineteen
that's what Kovan nineteen actually is
again another controversial statement
because I could believe it's a frog and
therefore it is a frog that's that's
complete insanity but it's not that far
off from what we're already doing we
believe that some of us might believe
that it's a bioweapon some of us might
believe that it's a someone ate a bat
now the world economy's trash I mean
there's all kinds of wild stuff there's
a whole spectrum of crazy stuff we're
willing to believe here there might be
some truth to that but truth is
we'll get the truth in a second but the
concept of belief it's not a religious
thing it's not a theocratic thing it's
like belief is how we're making sense of
the universe when we have a limited
sensory input that we can process at a
time again three pounds of meat you
can't store it's not like a computer up
here it's not a hard drive that stores
everything you're creating models of the
universe in your brain and so you're
trying to figure out what is going on
about the world with these limited
inputs and you use belief to to make
sense of that and again this is okay too
because this is what humans naturally do
and then you'll always believe what
kovat is right so this the inverse of
never knowing what it is so whatever you
believe Kove it is you're going to
continue to believe into the future even
if you're presented with different
evidence it's not that you're gonna dig
your heels in and say well I was
presented with some evidence but I think
this this first conclusion I had was
right you're going to glom on to that
you're gonna take what's useful to you
and upend it on your chain as you go
Neuros gonna believe that that original
belief that you have is going to mutate
over time but the theme of that original
belief will carry through you're not
gonna do a hard break people just don't
do hard breaks very often statistically
speaking they they kind of evolve over
time and over the days so what we're
looking at here is what feels like a
juxtaposition between knowing something
and believing something but they're not
actually juxtaposed at all they're
actually they intertwine they interact
and we in the West are not taught about
that we're not taught that these two
things interact we're taught that belief
is superstition and knowledge is the
only thing that exists if you approach
with that methodology to this problem
you're gonna make too many mistakes so
how do we solve problems or well not
solve or not here to solve anything
we're here to explore so how do we
explore problems that we can never know
and when oh the only thing we have is
belief well it's not just kovat it's not
just kovat that has this problem it
turns out the global economy whatever
construct you have in your mind about
the global economy same exact problem
you don't know anything about it you'll
never know what the global economy is
it's too it's too huge it's distributed
is it Goldman Sachs is it some
Rothschild is that the central banks is
it a bunch of farmers this is it a
credit swap agreement between two
different houses two different banking
exchanges there's a million different
parts that's going on here you'll only
ever get a tiny subset of what the
global economy is it's it's this massive
body of activity in human action so
you'll never really know what the global
economy is but again we'll certainly
have beliefs about it and you'll always
believe what it is based upon what your
original beliefs are again how do we
explore the problems we can never know
now as I was saying there is the
interplay between truth and belief this
is called epistemology which is the
science of knowledge right so we we take
the step back instead of going down the
trolley route and saying it's gonna wipe
out the people but that'll save the
economy or it's gonna wipe out the
economy but that I'll see the people
instead we say okay there's a subset of
truths about kovat 19 that exist I don't
know them
but I'm willing to accept that they
exist then we go into beliefs about
kovat 19 which I have beliefs about
kovat they might be wrong
but other people have beliefs and they
might be wrong but some of them might be
right I don't know what they are but I'm
willing to accept there's a subset of
things that my brain is doing about
kovin 19 right now I'm trying to
establish truths about it and I have
beliefs about it and these two things
intersect they're not opposite they're
not enemies this isn't a a dialectic
we're trying to extract from where we're
understanding that these two things
automatically synthesize no dialectic
required and from that synthesis you get
knowledge about kovat 19 so you get
useful action by by reconciling the
beliefs with the truths it's not enough
to find truths about the kovat 19
situation those truths are not going to
do anything for you it's not a question
of oh it opens the road and
all problems are solved no it doesn't
solve all the problems because there is
a intrinsic relationship between the
economy and the people by influencing
one you influence the other which has a
feedback back to what you've done so
finding a truth isn't enough you still
have to reconcile your beliefs as you
try to make sense of this situation now
I've been talking in the abstract a lot
so I promise you we're gonna get into
more concrete examples of this kind of
high-minded crap that I'm spewing right
now it also turns out that there's
another thing that happens when you
reconcile with truths and beliefs
you get poorly justified true beliefs
which is to say you are right about your
knowledge you have pragmatic stuff you
can do about it you just can't defend it
very well that's what that means so you
might have a glimmer of understanding of
what's going on but you just don't know
how to defend it in either a court of
law or in front of a scientist or in
front of a lawyer you just you just suck
you just know something right and this
this kind of struggle leads to two
outcomes that are completely again these
the outcomes are completely okay they
work the first is having knowledge about
it where you can explain it you can
defend it other people see it they can
repeat it it's good that leads to more
traditional science routes and then the
poorly justified true beliefs is what's
known as a black box it works you just
don't know why and the world is full of
black boxes AI for the vast majority of
AI is actually a black box you put an
input it gives you the output you know
why worked it just did and that's that's
okay he said this is all okay none of
this is a stigma there's a huge cultural
stigma around this sort of stuff so
epistemology we're gonna lay out on the
on the bottom
what faded interview was this gradient
where we have localized belief of going
from going from left to right define
truth communal truth localize truths
adjustable process teaser pragmatic
black boxes define beliefs communal
beliefs local beliefs so local beliefs
are things that you and local truths are
things that you have experienced
communal beliefs and truths are things
that many of us have experienced
define beliefs are things and define
beliefs and define truths are things
that exist independent of both all of
this leads to a pragmatic pragmatic
black box or an adjustable prossies I'm
getting ahead I want to walk you through
all this stuff I promise this gonna make
sense if this is over anyone said if I'm
going too fast I will I will I will make
this all work I promise
so here's some examples finally some
examples right as high-minded Crabbe I'm
spinning so a localized belief would be
Kovac 19 appear scary that's a pretty
common local belief i i certainly have
that local belief communal beliefs is
something that we all tend to agree on
we need to self isolate whether we do it
or now it's a different story but we
need to that's e belief and then the
define belief is that copa 19 exists
it's there it's in the world right so
these are beliefs they feel like truths
they certainly feel like troops but
their beliefs no it's the distinction
well let me give you some examples some
truths a localized truth is that many of
us do not know many people with it
that's a true statement Cova 19 is
staring people that is a true statement
as well it's not that it appears scary
it is doing it right that it's
definitively doing this this is
repeatedly you take a snippet of the
world and you get hey this is scaring
people okay scaring people define truths
would be that we can demonstrate that
kovin 19 has hurt the stock exchanges
30% wipe of the market just in the past
like month it's been disaster so what do
we do with these points right well
excuse me one moment I believe I have to
sneeze nope I don't have to okay
therefore there wasn't the truth of it
so we have our we have our beliefs and
our truths and what we're trying to do
is we're trying to find other black
boxes or adjustable processes we don't
know what they are right now so we're
going to walk through and explore and
figure out the hell these are and
so yeah we're trying to squeeze these
things together to reconcile to find out
what we can actually do about it instead
of either listening to an authority or
listening to some conspiracy or
listening to our friends what can we
actually tangibly do about this stuff to
understand the cycle between the people
the economy and all the interrelation so
because of this those little those
little boxes I showed you in the bottom
that's it's a categorization process
we're trying to categorize what's a
belief and what is knowledge what is
truth so that we can find ology see this
is an epistemic categorization and what
is the epistemic categorization of this
virus well it's a nightmare
unfortunately now why is it a night
where nightmare because of how it's all
combined this is a lot I'm gonna walk
you through this race okay Pat so
there's this giant gray box in the
middle of the screen other people
noticed it yeah your mouse is on the
right now yeah there you go there you go
thanks folks so we have let's just start
with some high-level categorization so
we can wrap our head around this problem
we have infected and we have uninfected
I think that's a fair categorization to
start with it might be to course but
it's where we start because we're
exploring we're not trying to solve
we're exploring right so put on your
door the Explorer hat and away we go
infected people can be further
categorized into these people are
infected and they know it they're
infected and they don't know it they're
infected and they believe they have it
they're infected and they don't believe
they have it now the last of the two
here that you can see that I'm circling
of these two that can be broken down
further into people who are infected
they don't know it and they know they
can get it people are infected they
don't know it and they don't know they
can get it people are infected you see
how it combines right it just kind of
explodes from there right so each one of
these is a category that you have to
account for when you're trying to figure
out what is true and what is a belief
this is very important in the belief
analysis part because this indicates the
type of range of actions that a person's
willing to take based upon these
categorization motives effectively or
state of being the infected person
don't believe they have it they are
infected and they don't believe they
will get it that's that's a totally
different spectrum of action that person
will take as opposed to a person who's
uninfected and they know it it'll
totally influence our actions now going
through the unaffected side same rules
apply there's a lot of combinations of
these different types of categories now
so as you could tell it's uh it gets
messy real quick when you start
combining all these things together and
so if anybody tries to say well I have
the truth of something well first you
have to you have to have to resolve this
combination of of interactions because
each one of these people are interacting
with each other that is what infection
is that is what the economy is human
action interacting with one another so
how do all of these types of people
interact mmm that's that's a tough one
that's a huge amount of data you have to
gather so we tend to rely on heuristics
we tend to rely on belief to help us
navigate this mess and again that's okay
there is no stigma to belief because
it's a starting point to make sense of
all this stuff now again there are
people who tend to come up and they like
to say oh no it's the blue church ball
with loud opinions and they'll say oh
because this messy combination of stuff
it's right for trolling it's right for
propaganda and disbelief and all the
negative things and that is true that's
a true statement
that's legit right so let's explore
precisely how to do disinformation
campaign given this combination of
information so here is a I made all
these numbers up none of these are true
they're just demonstrations so what I've
done is I've taken the uninfected group
here I broken them down into no believe
don't know don't believe and then
further can't get can't get so forth
right and I've done the same for the
infected and these percentages again
they're made up their garbage but
they're demonstrating a point they're
demonstrating the chances of this group
of people intersecting with this group
of people and then coordinating in a way
that can help them for their local
problems I'm just stuck because there's
a what there's way more different
combinations of factors you're looking
at here I didn't even represent infected
interacting with in fact that are
uninfected interact this is purely just
like a small subset of of how crazy you
want to play this game of of seeing what
these categorizations what how these
categories interact with each other in a
way that's beneficial to each and as you
can tell it's just these this is just
nuts and this is a failure of of
categorization theory to a degree which
is in sense a failure of set theory
which in turn could be a failure of the
scientific approach which we will get to
so if there is a fear here there's a
genuine fear that there's some
disinformation campaign I would like for
you to point to me what cell do you
target to get the maximum amount of
disinformation
that's really hard because there's too
much craziness going on there's too much
interaction going on here it's not Lake
case a central conspiracy where I can
come down and say oh if I touch this
cell it'll spread to all these other
cells now structurally yes there are
center points that you can target to
maximize the influence of these
statistics you could say targeting
central media you could say target
central banking and it influenced all of
these variables at once that's
absolutely true that's a bias and a
weighting approach but if I was just a
4chan troll I say I'm gonna try this
number I'm gonna hack this by 5% I'm
gonna put some disbelief here I'm gonna
bring down by 5% so their ability local
coordinate will go down and so therefore
ha I'm the master troll I don't know I
have no idea what kind of effect that's
gonna have on the rest of these numbers
it's too small of an operation so if if
trolls are your biggest concern if this
information from individual actors bad
faith actors is your primary concern
you're giving them too much power
because for starters if they are able to
touch one of these cells and influence
all the other cells
it sounds like they should be in charge
of the covert 19 response more than not
be allowed to be anywhere near it
because if they can predict their
interactions with these with these
points then these guys are really good
and you should probably tap them for
their brain power instead of being
afraid of them of course blue church
ball has its meltdown but that's blue
church ball right so this this is the
this is the combination of of how
complicated it can get really quickly
when you're trying to figure out
epistemic categories and approaches so
let's back off the hard science approach
because it's just outright impossible
it's pointless
it's almost premature to a degree let's
instead try to explore proxies of truth
again we're not solving the problem of
the economy and the virus what we're
doing is we're trying to explore the
interactions between our beliefs and the
truths we can discover to find brought
two proxies of truth we're not finding
solutions we're finding proxies of truth
a proxy of truth is
is sort of like a foothold where you can
then expand your options to do further
exploration right so if I was to start
with localized beliefs the three
examples I gave when I started over
nineteen appear scary this will then
open up things I need to resolve and
what proxy is a truth can I find that
are local to me how can I solve the
things I'm afraid of
if covin 19 appears scary that I'm
scared of something and I need to figure
out what it is I'm actually scared about
right so that's that's a truth
exploration process I should go through
I should find proxies to understand what
I am actually afraid of and then
identify that if I can't do that for
whatever reason maybe I'm like extremely
extroverted and I have no experience
with introversion and self exploration
again that's fine not everyone is the
same you should start looking at other
people that so if you're extrovert
oriented you should probably be looking
at what other people are afraid of and
what solutions they're finding to manage
that that fear could be I self isolation
alcoholism that's a thing right there's
a whole medley of solutions you start
looking and seeing how they're
interacting with one another so
depending upon what your preferences are
there are ways to get to the heart of
what actually appears scary about this
when you do that you will come to a
defined truth that is defined to you I'm
sorry that I have some solutions of what
I'm afraid of right so now you have some
truths to figure out this belief you're
not trying to eliminate the belief this
isn't the scientific method I'm
promoting I'm not saying eliminate the
belief I'm saying evolve the belief into
these proxies of truth and that is
important because there's one more step
after this so let's move on we need the
self isolate to communal beliefs here's
the example self-isolation interferes
with my routines that's called being
self honest maybe we have maybe we have
stuff to do maybe I have to go shop or
buy food you know this is this is a
significant impact on my ability to to
stay you know not infected while
simultaneously staying alive so this is
a truth about the belief the belief is
we need the self isolate the truth is
it's kind of hard we got stuff to do
and self-isolation isn't even widely
embraced so there are other nations that
are not engaging in the self isolation
paranoia that we're doing right now so
take I think Japan but they're iffy on
their numbers from what I've seen but I
think Norway was pretty aggressive about
not self isolating at all and then
there's other states in America that
aren't engaging in self isolation now
there's shame tactics and all these
things that happen and you know trying
to yell at each other to you know stay
indoors but for the most part we have
them we have a diaspora of self
isolation adhesion or usage you know
what I mean
so okay so now we have self isolation we
need to but the truth of it is that
we're not really actually doing it it's
it's not a solution that's that's a
defined truth self isolation by itself
is not a solution because you have too
many people engaging in whatever they
think self isolation is they have their
belief of what self isolation means and
so that's informing their proxy of truth
and it's not gonna be the same for all
of us so because of that self isolation
simply isn't a solution by itself
because we're dealing with an infectious
agent so now we have Koba 19 exists as
are defined belief I don't have close
relations with many kovat 19 patients
I'm speaking from my localized truth
position that's probably true for a lot
of us as well although I don't want to
speak out of turn and if you are dealing
with Kovan 19 my absolute regards in
this situation from what I've read about
it it is rather frightening when it
really kicks off but I do know
communally that that there are reports
of people with it so there are certainly
some people with it even though I don't
know anybody who has it or I don't have
close relations with many people who so
I'm left with a defined truth that some
people have Kovan 19 others don't have
it now this seems kind of elementary
that I'm walking through maybe I'm
giving too much emphasis on my own
performance on explaining it but this is
all pretty basic conclusions we may have
sort of reached on our own but again
this is a transitory step there is a
final step after this
I'll give you some more we're gonna
click through I'm certainly not showing
any Cova 19 symptoms I'm coughing from
time to time that's about it so I don't
know so if I'm not showing symptoms but
let's look at the truth I don't have
access to reliable testing that's a
localized truth I can't just go to the
doctor be like yo I got kovat and be
like you know yes no it's just not an
option I'll have that Nations are not
providing the same testing coverage when
we expanded a communal they're not
providing the same coverage at all they
don't have enough tests some nations or
militant about it other nations or not
we're left with the defined truth that
there isn't widespread access to Coba 19
testing then the illustrious hilarious
bat soup problem where communally some
guy a bat soup and then this the stock
market lost 30% I've never eaten a bat
so that's a localized truth I am 100%
confident that I've never eaten a bat
although someone may have snuck it into
my canned food once you never know but I
do know that bats migrate they are a
migratory species some of them do fly as
great distances as birds do that's a
known thing so what this does now we're
getting to an interesting proxy of truth
the first three that I've the first four
kind of throw away they're just like
demonstrating what I'm talking about
here now we're because we're engaging in
this proc to your truth process now
we've come up with something interesting
we've come up with an interesting proxy
the bat migration should have an
influence on Cove Kotov because I can't
spell Cove in 19 spread it should
because of these things of terrible
carriers then well its douche bat
migrations and kovin infections should
be simultaneous should be one to one
right so now we found a proxy of truth
that we can stand on and say now wait a
minute this is missing from my belief
system I did not have this previously ah
okay interesting so we're taking our
beliefs we're exploring them not to
cancel the belief or not Western
scientific method we're saying I this
was not part of my belief system before
now I have to reckon
Silus interesting okay so then Kovac 19
started in China that's very common I
think that's a defined belief at this
point I don't know much about Chinese
public health policies me personally
maybe there's a Chinese public health
policy expert in the audience right now
but I'm certainly not that person so
that's my localized truth communal truth
is that other pandemics did start in
China they have SARS and all types of
animal human viruses that jumped other
pandemics have started in China there's
a long history of that and so China does
have ways as so from these two built
truths we can then derive that China has
ways to assess where to apply public
health policies so they are they do have
metrics they are using if we assume
China has X number of resources and Y
number of people so how do we apply how
do we distribute how to answer not we
how does China distribute the X
resources to the Y people and then it's
not a utilitarian distribution it's not
like they're going for the widest amount
of people they can go for they're going
for specific people they're giving
resources to the specific people that
they particularly want to save and we
can identify as best we can at least we
can we can attempt to identify who it is
they're willing to save and who it is
they're willing to sacrifice so this
gives us useful information about their
public health policy which can then
inform how other nations might be either
following it or what they're doing
differently and then a couple more and
then we'll move on to the final piece
hospitals are place that can help I've
seen hospitals request more supplies so
I this is my local truth because I've
I'm actually dealing with some of the
acquisition of supplies to some of these
hospitals and the communal truth is that
well the the media is showing Italian
hospitals as New York hospitals here is
that one little flub they did a couple
days ago that made the rounds and that's
what are you doing guys right on one
hand they might be doing that to convey
to point that this is scary and you
should
do the self isolating like we're saying
it or they could be just a bunch of
jerk-offs being dicks with cameras or
they could be both simultaneously it's
not necessarily mutually exclusive the
hospital is what we're able what we're
able at least from my local truth
perspective I know that hospitals are
requesting more supplies I know that
there are media reports showing the
wrong hospitals on purpose I know that
in addition to the media on social media
people are sharing videos and
attributing the hospital's where those
videos did not come from so it's obvious
that these hospitals do not have any
control over what is said about them on
social media and even what is said about
them on legacy media what this means to
me is that hospitals are now prepared to
handle this bitch is simply not quite
the supplies that they're getting and
the media the lack of media control on
their front means that any type of scare
can panic people into a hospital
unnecessarily which says to me that
they're not prepared for it
so this this type of this type of fear
can influence the resource acquisition
from the hospital's one Hospital might
get more supplies that they shouldn't
the other one will get less supplies and
this Platero right here is not helping
things at all
so this belief is that hospitals can
help but because of the problem here
they might not be places that can help
and that's that's unfortunate cuz that's
a really deeply held local belief from
many many people there will be a cure
eventually yeah that's that's a hopeful
belief I mean I don't want to be the the
black pill Negative Nancy on this one
but let's look at a localized truce
so President Trump's a hydroxy
chloroquine works and then of course in
Arizona couple decided to take the fish
cleaner which is not hydroxychloroquine
but whatever I've seen President Trump
say that I don't know if it works but
I've seen him say that there are at
least six distinct koban 19 vaccine
trials initiatives going on right now
from different countries so as a result
we have a Anti
chemical solution and we have an
attenuated back an attenuated viral
vaccine solution now the challenge here
is that you can only take one or the
other from a market share perspective if
I'm manufacturing a million pills of
hydro hydroxychloroquine and I'm putting
in the tremendous money for vaccine
trials FDA approvals everything else I'm
looking at a sick person as a unit of
market I then have to then put this into
right so if I give you a vaccine there's
a chance you're not gonna take the the
anti malarial and if I give you the anti
malarial and it works there's a chance
you're probably not getting the vaccine
although you might right so there is a
market pressure here this is an
interesting thing that's not being
discussed it's being alluded to so this
is another one of those interesting
proxies of truth hey now wait a second
these two might have competitive
pressures with one another that's
interesting right so now your your
belief space is now expanded and you
have to then reconcile and then finally
Co V 19 is causing mass unemployment I'm
currently working at home because of
contagion fears which sucks I am and
there's a lot of people who are just at
home and not working which sucks even
more
I dunno communally that 6 million people
applied for unemployment I think is that
10 million now but I don't know if those
numbers are true but I know at least six
that's astronomical that's that is
absolutely
that's like beyond Great Depression
levels and so again the shredded code if
19 we know that it is damaging the
economy so from this belief the belief
is that it's causing mass employment
turns out it probably is right so this
is damaging the economy so what we've
done is we've explored beliefs and we
turn them into practice truths we're not
solving it were exploring we're trying
to figure out our belief space more than
anything else okay so why am i harping
on about belief in knowledge and all
this stuff right this seems so freakin
elementary and fundamental and here's
why here's why I've spent so much time
on this this is the process we've been
going through traditionally in the West
at least this is how we go about our
process we take our belief take
and we stay oh we found proxies of truth
and then we will find the random
questionable of the thing right we'll
find this one truth
this one axiom that's so pure and so so
absolutely binding and then we can
dismiss the process that we use to get
there and we can dismiss the belief
entirely we can come back all of it into
this grand unquestionable of the thing
and then poof we have it right
this is this is the this is the Western
scientific tradition specifically the
materialist scientific tradition where
we it's a it's a flow it's a pipe flow
or you start here you follow the line
and you get to the great truth and then
you have your science your big science
that they always see on reddit right
this is absolutely not going to help for
the reasons that we've already explored
so this is probably useless right this
does not help us at all in the current
solution because of the feedback
mechanism between the economy and the
people just because you found the
unquestionable thing for the economy
does not mean you found the
unquestionable thing for the people so
oops
you found your grant unquestionable
thing but it's it's great in isolation
it has no pragmatic value whatsoever so
what do you actually have to do you have
to reconcile you have to reconcile your
beliefs with your proxies of truth to
find a process and in this case we know
that Kovan 19 starts in China we have
our we have our practice of truth and
then we say oh the reconciliation is we
need a process to explore what metrics
China is using to guide pandemic
response this is a rational thing you
should be considering because you can't
get to here if you use the materialistic
scientific tradition because the
materialistic scientific tradition is
too busy trying to find these silver
bullets it's trying to find these
one-shot kills that that unify all of
these systems and unify all these
responses that's not gonna work because
the the the the challenge space is too
complicated you have too many variants
in the virus you have too much variance
in the global economy so you have to
build these little ladder step ladder
like steps to get to these processes and
that will give you a much better way of
solving these complicated problems so
just to familiar with this when we
resolve that we say a process to examine
fear to a to identify prime
motivations that's an important process
to have when we are tackling this
particular problem because if you don't
even if you don't have a process for
that man if you're fear-driven then the
rest of this stuff isn't even all work
process to evaluate motives of nodes and
interconnect the networks again
self-isolation we now know that these
people interact their nodes and network
and and what are their actual motives
how effective will the self-isolation
actually be covin 19 exists i you know
some people have it others don't we need
to explore why countries have different
infection rates why why is one country
hit harder than the other
why is italy so devastated is that all
media is it not media is you know you
have to look at these differentials
because that's gonna give you
understanding of things that you that
you're not gonna get elsewise otherwise
you'll just you just be exposed to like
oh and i wasn't probably got hit me but
i got so bad and then like a week later
be like oh then then say you're go my
god you panicking all the time it's not
gonna do any good to explore you know
look at the differentials what was
effective what wasn't explore why
testing is so different why is it so
hard the test right this will force you
to look into the actual biomechanics of
the virus which is admittedly
complicated because it's four ology and
always is but it's something you should
know anyway when you're trying to tackle
this problem you need to know as you
need to have a process to extract useful
pragmatic knowledge or at least black
boxes from this thing excuse me that it
comes from bat soup then let's look at
how bat carriers work and we can
immediately dismiss that if you look at
the migration and transmission rate so
that's just not it right and we only get
to that conclusion because we've found
the process to examine that hey bat
migration should have should have an
influence so starts in china then we
explore what metrics china is using the
guide pandemics we walk through that a
process to identify which hospitals are
prepared in which rooms or not that's
really important to that's like a
variation of this problem or at least
this process might be able to steal some
of the techniques you get and you use
here to then apply here to figure out
the preparation scale obviously New York
and Los Angeles but other players as
well trying to
economic pressures of a cure that is a
very fascinating part of this problem
because that is going to have an
influence on a lot of these other things
leading up to it because everybody wants
to cure now they're all afraid they've a
stir or all self or trying to be self
isolated I should say but the economic
pressures for the Cure matter on the
run-up to the cure not after the cure
has already been given so there's
definitely going to be pressures
associated there you want to find boards
you want to find people what are they
actually doing and then finally you want
to examine how the economy is
anticipating the future so when you
combine all of these when you figure out
all of these processes you'll then be
able to deal with this one which is what
this talk is ultimately about how do you
how is the economy anticipating future
the economy doesn't exist in a current
state it doesn't say oh I traded this
Apple for this banana and that's the end
of the transaction forever no we keep a
receipt we keep a list we analyze those
lists we analyze transactions we then
make projections into the future about
where things are going like for example
you have all these hospitals that are
ordering thousands of beds that they
didn't have previously what are they
going to do with these beds when this is
over it's not like they can keep them in
their facility it'll block up all their
space what are they gonna do with it
well there has to be some company out
there who's going to take that response
that I'll take those surplus beds and
I'll allocate them somewhere else so
there's already an agent in this network
who's anticipating moving those beds out
to a profitable location after this
whole thing is over and they're already
setting timelines and oh they have the
profit motive to care about this sort of
stuff so you have to do is find these
people and now you can start getting and
building a complete picture about how
these things are inter flowing and
influencing one another so instead of
relying on news and relying on whatever
localized sources the truth you can
extract and using that as your
foundation of operation if you search
for these processes you're going to
expand both your truth space and your
belief space simultaneously and you're
going to get more comfortable
reconciling them so finally to wrap this
all up because I know this is a lot and
I'm thinking I don't know my time is I
apologize
Peter so
this is the Cova trolley why are we
picking epistemic reconciliation over
materialist scientific tradition because
three factors the story never ends
agents adapt and once the once struck
the golf balls on its own the story
never ends means right here
once that kovat hits it's not going to
you know do that and then leave koba's
going to do this over and over and over
again and it's going to influence each
other and as it does so these players
are going to respond as the kovat is
doing this for example not being talked
about but October there's going to be a
second round of this yeah there's gonna
be a second round of COBIT as it mutates
and more people are going to get hit
with it so how are the people in the
economy gonna adapt as they go around
with this right it's gonna go round and
round and finally once struck the golf
ball is on its own once kovat is in this
cycle it's gonna do whatever the hell at
once we're gonna do our best to steer it
of course hopefully using epistemic
reconciliation but more likely we're
unfortunately going to use this but this
thing is on its own is on a crash course
and mapping it is gonna be tough but if
you find the processes to then examine
this you can actually get to how these
two are interacting and finally how this
is interacting with these and poor
governments sitting here with almost
nothing it can do about anything
there's throughout most of history
pandemics governments did it they just
throw their hands up in the sea they
doom entire cities and say sorry pal
that's it the idea of this intervention
is government coming in and paying your
bills and not making rent happen again
the same rules apply the story never
ends let's say people don't pay rent
what does that do the economy okay well
now you're not collecting rent which
means which means mortgage futures are
probably gonna have problems and so that
can cascade into even more economic
effects which can now displace these
people will make them homeless and if
they're homeless what do you think the
spread of virus is when they're all
homeless and these camps together guess
what we just accidentally made the
problem worse
so these are the type of things you have
to really really look at you have to
look at it carefully right we're not
under I mean we're under a gun this
thing right here but you still have the
freedom to explore the interaction of
your
puzzles the interaction of how these
players interact that's a I was at El
Tala gee I apologize but you'll be able
to understand you'll be able to have
processes to understand how these
players are influencing one another
because once that golf ball is on its
way it's not leaving and that's it thank
you for listening my Tech Talk I'll take
questions oh cool so Pat can you unshare
your screen yes I think so
[Music]
what Pat does that this is I think
that's what would do are you okay to
stay maybe 15 30 minutes after or like
yeah so if anyone has to leave they can
they can leave any time they want so
we're open it up to questions and we'll
probably and at 8 o'clock Eastern Time
or sooner so if you have any questions
for Pat write in the chat box I'll call
on you to unmute yourself or if you want
me to read on your path just indicate
that and I'll warm Pat up with a
question
so you mentioned the blue church ball I
think everybody Jordan Hall coined that
so I'm curious how do you think maybe
you can first just describe what you
think blue church means for the people
who don't know and how do you think the
blue church is currently responding to
the situation or how they will respond
to it in the future or maybe just how
they're up in their response
blue church is is the conquerors of the
scientific methodology that's how I tend
to define them so these are the people
the blue church finds its origin in the
1600s during after the 30 Years War when
the papacy and other Protestant actors
decided and hey you'll be hilarious if
we wipe each other out in a thirty year
war that sounds fun I mean while the
that was the origin of the blue church
was the idea that we need to back away
from this unholy union of the papacy
with kings and
stop that please and let the economies
as they are flow on their own and so the
blue church today is the apex evolution
of that incentive and of that drive
these are players who have done
fantastic work with taking
rationalization and scientific
methodology and really taking it to its
end to its furthest ends possible within
the constraints of whatever economic
system or whatever natural systems are
dealing with these are not stupid people
by any stretch of the imagination
but they have used this trick of science
extensively and it is the only trick
they know they don't know any other
methodology and so they've blinded
themselves to the other half of human
cognition which is belief belief is a
very important part of human cognition
and these guys make all of their profit
by basically stamping out of existence
and I don't mean belief in concepts of
God or anything like that I mean the
cognitive biomechanical processes of
belief they just pretend they don't
exist or if they do exist it's either a
conspiracy theory or it's something that
has to be regulated out of existence
or it's not scientific or it doesn't
pass muster they and they have infinite
gatekeepers for this sort of thing but
that's what power does power is
gatekeeping and they have been
successful from 1600 zone they made the
right gamble they put in the work they
put in the body-count they put on the
blood so they were able to build this
Empire of science very very well and
right now with the advent of AI and the
advent of neuro chimera and all of these
radical philosophy of mind discoveries
that have happened in the past 30 years
at least as a byproduct of the computer
age the blue church is under definitive
attack at the foundation level and they
have no idea how to even examine
themselves their scientific method is is
for their enemies it's not for
themselves they apply science to their
enemies so that inability to engage in
the necessary intra spectrum I think
is the inability to apply science to
your own failure it's the hallmark of
blue church decadence in my opinion cool
so Daniel you have a question could you
unmute yourself and ask a dependent yeah
first of all thank you so much for that
talk I really enjoyed it I was wondering
if you this is kind of an ill-formed
question but if you had to speculate on
the source of this apparent fragility
like it's just so clear that everything
is fragile where would you place it what
what are like the top candidates that
come to mind this one there's just one
source of fragility it's it's blank
slate
wellthanks slate is the source of all
fragility of this system if you
eliminate blank slate which we will be
able to do very soon the blue shark is
gone it is it is the foundation of
everything they do and what is blank
slate right now it is it's the it's the
job its lock in concert lucky John Locke
made it popular but he didn't
necessarily invent it blank slate is the
idea that every human is born with
nothing the idea that we can we are what
we are the sum of our experiences
that's what's what blank slate tries to
say well that's that's not the full
picture we're also the sum of four
billion years of evolution so yeah you
can't just say like oh it's the this
mythical three pound bag of meat called
the brain whatever i chiseled in that
that's who you are no that's that's not
who we are that's one part of who we are
we're also four billion years of
winner-take-all evolution
we're also predator-prey we're also
scanning reality not at the atomic level
we have the ability to see each atom
because the way photons work with photon
bounces off the atom
I'm sorry not bounces photon gets
absorbed by the atom photon then rejects
an atom so every photon in this universe
comes from an atom and yet we don't see
atoms we see weird emerging thing our
entire visual cortex has evolved to see
each other not atoms we're seeing each
other for mating reasons social reasons
coordination
reasons so this is a this is not
something that was chiseled into my
brain because some propaganda minister
put it in there that's four billion
years of evolution and you can't just
throw that out the window because it's
inconvenient you can't say well we're
all equal and that's it that's it and if
you disagree I'm gonna use my massive
force to clobber you in the face you
can't do that we are social creatures
first we are the byproduct of neural
evolution and these things are messy and
these things suck these are very
dangerous games that we're standing on
top of so I would say the blank slate
Theory has done its best to eliminate
those games from our cognition and try
to say we don't to worry about that
anymore because power is consolidated in
academia or it's powered it's
consolidated in some kingdom and that
person is dictating reality and that
person dictates that you are a blank
slate you are replaceable cog so
therefore off and go learn
something to improve yourself and I
think if you hammer blank slate for
exactly what it is you will dismantle
the blue church entirely as a really
quick follow-up to that I'm sure you've
noticed that behavioral economics is
kind of in vogue these days also in
positions of governance and it at least
gives lip service to what if you're
talking about that it acknowledges our
bounded rationality and we have
biological predispositions that don't
necessarily give us accurate
perspectives of reality what would you
say is the reason why that's
insufficient because it's still it's
still pegged to the concept of reality
it's still pegged that there is a
scientific concept the reality start
there is a scientific concept of reality
it's science conceives of it so
therefore it is a concept of reality but
it does not have a monopoly on reality
and so trying to appeal to that reality
is sort of a transitory step but it is
not the only one cool thank you all
right so Marshall had a question that's
related to the blue church I'll read it
on his behalf
Pat what in your opinion are the most
useful abstractions or practices that
can be gleaned from the blue church and
scientist
materialism hmm yeah don't throw the
baby out with the bathwater I do agree
the blue church did accidentally stumble
on philosophy of mind that is true but
you can backtrack that technically all
the way back to Plato the one thing that
it god I hate sometimes I just hate
philosophical artists because they just
got so lost in the weeds and they just
don't step back and take things in the
anachronism in which it was born so
there's one statement that Plato has
said and said storytellers rule the
world
it didn't say logical people rule the
world
he didn't say computer scientists or
engineers ruler he said storytellers
rule the world now we've been on this
2,000 year and and for what it's worth
the post the post modernists do have a
okay point regarding this we've been on
this 2,000 year tear trying to reproduce
the works of Aristotle and Plato but to
Plato until we're bored in the face with
it all but we just kind of missed that
footnote as storytellers rule the world
that's a really important footnote to
miss if we're interested in actually
trying to represent the world as it
currently is so I think it's worthwhile
to backtrack and reevaluate Plato not as
as some type of philosopher who was
trying to create this very weird version
of society according to whatever
efficiencies he deemed a higher priority
he came up I mean she the work he put
into play I mean we're almost
everything's a footnote of Plato if you
really get down to it understanding the
power of stories means giving credence
to belief
and if we're not willing to give
credence to belief as the blue church
deems that we shouldn't ever do then
that's the part of the bathwater you
need to throw out I don't I don't think
the patient is inoperable I think there
are you can cherry-pick parts that are
good in parts that are bad
there are certain discussions to be had
about what parts are decent like for
example that I'm a programmer by trade
20 years doing it weighed too long
commercial internet web technologies
primarily I've swive watched the
internet become what has become it's a
disaster this is not the internet that
we've tried to built this is the what
corporate internet would look like if
they had a shot at but I suspect in a
couple years the only social media
platform that'll be left is LinkedIn or
at least everything will look like
LinkedIn a very boring sterile
everybody's showing their perfect face
social credit system that's not the
Internet I wanted that's not the
internet I building I wanted weird oh
 posting all over the place that's
what I want because I like the full
spectrum of human belief I'm not afraid
of human belief I like it as it is even
if it believes in the weird stuff I
think if blue church gets its head out
of its ass long enough to say hey we
don't need dominance of the narrative
it's okay to let people express
themselves and great but if they're not
willing to do that unfortunately now we
have to talk the power game which means
we may accidentally end up taking away
from the blue church what's actually
good for the rest of us just as part of
a power negotiation that sucks but
that's a reality I'm fully prepared for
I might be alone or in the minority on
that so so there's another question
that's I'm gonna piggyback off it and
this is from Joe when every donors
behalf what are the most promising
analytical processes you've been seeing
developed outside of the institutions by
the ecosystem of collective sense makers
hmm
i ARPA comes to mind technically part of
the institution but they are fascinating
the super forecaster research has been
unbelievable they are this is a black
box right and so this is this is where
science starts to have problems in its
black box bases there are people who can
predict the future I'm gonna use some
dumb parlance right now and I'll explain
what that means but there are people
that can predict the future repeatedly
it is repeatedly proven that people can
predict some parts of the future we
don't have any
the idea how it's actually done but it
is repeatedly provable and to
demonstrate the repeatability of it when
you put people in a group they predict a
future better than people who operate
alone
this is repeatably provable over and
over and over again how the hell does
that even comport to scientific
methodology what are you gonna do you're
gonna cut up the brain well listener on
was thrown to this and this foot nest
that's not what's going on these
bringing more Minds together allows them
to sense make collectively but not
synchronistically so that sense making
and in the sense where they're
eliminating all beliefs and they're
coming up like brain ants where everyone
thinks the same and so they can amplify
their position they're holding on to
their individuality and they're
collectively navigating each other's
individuality and that in turn is
improving their ability to predict the
future this the variance of this is
called knockout training in AI which I
was describing yesterday to you Peter
where if I give you a book and I rip out
a page and I rip out every other page so
I rip out all the even though it's a
book so you have like you know what I
mean I'm just a PDF I give you a PDF
file and I knock out all the the even
pages right so you get pages one three
five five and if I can count right so if
you were to read this PDF you'd read
page one you get the page three and
you'd read it now there's a really good
chance you'd be able to figure out what
you missed
right if page one was talking about
Samuel and Samuel is the hero and then
page three everybody's celebrating the
funeral Samuel you could probably allude
to the fact that on page two we probably
died but you can piece that together to
some capacity that is important in AI
training as well when you have a
training set so if I'm trying to train
an AI to see apples or oranges I can
either feed it 4,000 pictures of apples
so they can get an understanding of what
an apple is but if I knock out if I
randomly knock out pictures of that
training set if I randomly say no you're
not going to get this Apple they're not
going to get this one it actually
improves the AIS performance by 50% so
we can find
apples 50% better if you don't feed it
if you don't hand feed it everything
that is a group that is nuts so even
these AIS are demonstrating a need for
belief without actually formally coming
to that conclusion there is a benefit of
belief in it by negativo unfortunately
it's not this reproducible thing in the
scientific realm but this is belief via
negativa that's being demonstrated and
knock out training and we see the same
thing in the super forecaster research
so belief is the last great unexplored
part of philosophy of mind and by
default scientific methodology has no
interest in it whatsoever and that's I
think that's a fascinating part and I
think that's the oh that's a big
downfall of the oh the blue church okay
to do Julian would you like to read your
question just unmute yourself I in muted
you Julian oh is this working
yep okay my question was going from
alright down it's going from defined
truths to is there a good process from
going from a defined truth to coming up
with a process for the green box
whatever that was if you could walk
through that a bit yeah
basic investigative skills help if
there's like it just to get started
because we're all trained in the and the
material scientists space already so you
might as well use that training to your
advantage there's some there's some like
how to be a private eye for example
that's should do that on the weekend if
you can you can learn how to do it it's
just good to figure out the basic skills
of deduction but more pragmatically it's
about finding what's missing that tends
to be where I'm gonna give anecdotal
here I tend to be where I start I see
what's there and then I say now what's
missing from this how do you figure out
what's missing okay well give an example
right so if I was to walk in if saying
alien ship landed right alien ship just
landed right in my backyard and I have
no technology
you out of this world right like I can't
figure this stuff out there's alien
glyphs all over the place so somehow I
get in this ship cuz there's a hole on
the side and I walk in and I see dead
aliens that I'm looking around I'm like
okay how do I make sense of this right
okay one for starters they crashed all
right so what's missing what's missing
is why did they crash why did they not
account for gravity did they not account
for any type of electromagnet magnetism
we have been emitting what let's look at
any type of damages that they're
experiencing what's let's color the
blood what's what's the are they wearing
clothes for starters dude this is their
civilization have clothes let's look at
how their organ are arranged on their on
their control panels
do they have finger are they finger or
digit oriented are they psychically
connected right so you start looking at
all of them this is obviously a
ridiculous example but it's it's a
pragmatic one because I'm throwing you
into a space where there's no way you
can actually know anything about this
scenario so you try to find what's
missing instead right you try to do a
differential analysis between what do I
use when I was flying this ship versus
what are they using when they fly the
ship and from the differential analysis
you can then get what's missing and from
that missing you actually derive these
without these green boxes cool Dan you
had a question for Pat yeah I have a
question you seem to this whole blue
church thing you seem to be discounting
it's like science is this and not
science is that and and so my question
is are not emerging complexity and chaos
theory a part of science your criticism
of science appears to discount these
Sciences I'm not familiar but as I said
with you Church lingo I was trained in
electrical engineering with a focus in
signals and systems can you explain why
you were eliminating network theory
merging complexity and chaos theory from
your explanations and criticisms yes
that's a fantastic question
it's it's it's an interest it's it's
interesting for multiple layers that
question because it's it on one hand
it's stating
we're finally ready to tackle the
complexity that we didn't have before
and that's true we do have that flat
it's also not true and here's why so so
a lot of science is trying to find this
axiomatic truth and then extrapolate and
build upon it this is kind of the
tradition that we've been doing for a
long time well what is what is electron
valence what is a transistor what is a
what is a chip and the extrapolating you
keep going and going getting that fine
level precision control over each step
of the process who can then extrapolate
to the next layer of emergence and as a
result you naturally explode into that
high level of complexity especially when
you have a billion circuits all over the
worlds firing asynchronously to one
another so the only reason complexity
science even exists is because we've
made the internet we've always been in
complexity complexity has been with us
since the very beginning we just have
been approaching it with the wrong tools
we didn't actually look at the
complexity it's a standalone concept and
say hey we should probably address that
as is we just kind of fumble along and
with with these kind of like proxies to
manage complexity which we've been
calling science this entire time so I
would I would say that the complexity as
an abstract concept even that is still
technically a model it's a good model
for the domain of problems its resolving
for sure but the complexity that you
think you're addressing it's still
beyond even that so I think complexity
science is kind of a preacher phrase I
think network graph theory Network
categorization topography analysis I
think that's more accurate but
complexity is always going to be one
step beyond whatever categories you put
around it just by by the definition of
the phrase and that might be semantic
argument I agree but our traditional
approach to handle complexity is so like
piece it off and we're still doing that
to this day but meanwhile our brain
resolves complexity in a fundamentally
different way than our scientific
approaches and belief is a big part of
that
if I may just follow up here it's it
seems to me that your your definition of
science seems to be very Cartesian it
requires it requires certainty and my
understanding of science it doesn't
require
we don't need that that that level of
South self doubt that that that
Descartes had that that it's the
probability fits within science we don't
have to be a hundred percent certain of
things but science can guide us in
reasonable directions that's right and
that's that's a problem of induction
that's been known since the Scottish
enlightenment where it doesn't you know
the traditional example is I've seen red
apples and I've seen a hundred apples
and they're all red and you can't state
that the next Apple you're gonna see is
green right or that is an ongoing
problem with induction but for science
pragmatically speaking it's good enough
you get along with it right you don't
need that high level precision every
step of the way as you said that's very
true and by science I actually mean the
scientific method the the means in which
we're going through and trying to
resolve the complexity into pragmatic
examples and you don't need the high
level of tremendous control over each
step of that that is true but that's it
it has a monopoly on our problem
resolving space it's not the only way to
resolve problems and AI the black box of
AI that's coming up and I don't mean
like Kurzweil Ian stuff I mean even like
self-driving cars how to you know how do
they work when the snow hits the road
like for example they don't talk about
that traditionally when you have a
self-driving car has six sensors you
tune with lidar and optics and I think a
couple other ones and that's good when
you're in California where it's not
raining there's no weather conditions
it's perfect Road all the time go to
Minnesota or somewhere that's snowing
hit a fresh plow of snow cars driving
what do you do now well the car now
shifts over to 26 totally different
sensors and one of those sensors is
pinging Google Maps to then find oh are
there landmarks I can orient myself to
and then from that orientation where is
the curb in the road so I can actually
stay in the road even though I can't
actually see it now admittedly there's
some improvements recently in lidar that
can penetrate the snow and tell the
difference between the snow in the road
yes but before that it was then kicking
off to an explosion
of sensory methodologies to then come up
with that probabilistic good enough
solution to then figure out where the
road is now the reason why that's
important is because that's actually not
how our brain works the data science is
trapped in this weird death spiral where
it needs more and more information to
resolve infinitely minut problems it
needs it needs bigger datasets and it
needs more training and it needs more
human beings to solve these more
complicated problems and get that extra
level of precision that's needed for
either an insurance settlement or or any
type of high-level maybe even a
Astrophysical research but that's not
how our brains actually work our brains
don't just go through mitosis and grow
more neurons whenever it comes across a
complicated problem we'd run ourselves
out of resources if we did something so
silly what what the brain is actually
doing instead the brain is taking the
limited resources it has and it's doing
its best it can with it it's dealing in
concepts of compression it's taking its
it's well long story short the brain is
solving these problems one way science
is solving them in a totally
fundamentally different way and as a
result you're getting two different
resource consumption strategies that are
not playing well with each other right
now and then that's why I'm kind of
heavy critic of the scientific
methodology at this time because AI is
showing that there is another way and
it's making it more and more apparent as
time goes on okay we'll do one more
question Solomon you had a question or
you had a few questions
you're gonna meet yourself or I will end
you
you're muted Solomon okay let me see the
ask okay
yeah what would be an alternative
antipas technology to transcend and
subscribe into another order of reality
now thinking about the living
consciousness classroom and the work of
Christopher Bates and David Bohm his
implicit order that kind of stopped and
then just something that has been
thinking the last weeks or months the
whole idea that we only know about 4% of
the knowable or what we think of the
knowable and then this dark matter and
all the other stuff so how about the
notion of law and regularity and
constants when or if each moment is a
singular event with its own unique
phenomenology and the question of flow
as a point of view I would that is
that's a fun little spot that I've seen
come into play when we started realizing
the limits of scientific methodology
probably around when the postmodernist
took a crack at it
admittedly they were sloppy by my
standards but they were coming up with
what you're talking about as a kind of
thought experiment to sort of tease at
and reveal some of the limitations of of
what we were doing with our scientific
utopia so just to give you an example of
a transcendence of reality it's got to
be a boring example but I'll give you
one when the NSA was starting around in
the 60s to integrate our fifties and
sixties integrated computers for their
signal analysis they intrinsically went
to and I'm not throwing shade at
electric engineers here I'm just
reciting history but they went the
electric engineers scientists hard
science professors physicists chemists
to write the first programs and they
were using a very primitive language I
think was binary and maybe assembly and
something else but
I might I might be recalling that
incorrectly but they were going to these
very very smart and very talented people
who understood every constraint and
every rule and every problem that could
possibly exist in any permutation of
multiple domains they went to these
people and they said write these
programs to help us in this signal
analysis because the signals are doing
weird things what what does it mean when
when the Russians are sending this
signal and it's bouncing in this weird
way I mean that's that's outside of of
what we know to be the case so how do we
decipher that or worse these pattern of
signals is coming through in a manner
that is defying us because is this
encrypted
wait what's encryption is that a thing
oh man wait they're out there up phew
skating with their messages now right so
when they went to these scientists their
reality their way of transcending
reality was it was materialism and
material science ISM when not sciencism
but hard actual scientific methodology
you know go through the rigor and do it
damn right they went to that and so when
they were trying to write their code
originally it just didn't work
absolutely did not work they were trying
to account for too much they didn't
understand that they were being
outplayed by other humans some of the
Russians were sending signals that were
easy to crack and when you cracked them
you got the answer but it wasn't the
answer you were looking for because
there was a secondary encryption in it
so there was all these things that
humans trying to outsmart each other and
from my experience scientists make
terrible spies from what I've seen so
what the what the NSA did instead is
that they started hiring a bunch of
musicians and philosophers and linguist
and they were writing the programs and
they were performing infinitely better
infinitely better in terms of getting
the code to work instead of trying to
get that pure scientific that scientific
purism
in the code to comply with the
limitations of the machine these guys
were willing to abuse those constraints
just to solve the problem and that that
is one of those transcendence points
that had profound ramifications on the
rest of our lives this is where you get
your Stallman's and
you got your linus torvalds and all of
these these so-called visionaries to
then look at computers in a totally
different transcendent matter so
everything has its place I'm not trying
I know I've been lashing out at science
a lot here and I don't mean to turn it
into a soapbox it is a tool science is a
tool but it's not the only tool if
there's anything to take away that would
be it it's not the only tool hmm so um
able to sneak in one more question if
that's okay with you pat so mimetic
caper if you can unmute yourself and
read your questions will be the last one
okay
hey hey Pat could science be described
as a search heuristic to find other
powerful heuristics that model
experience heuristics like the Edina
again sort of the science of a tool that
allows you to find other powerful
heuristic tools like you could you could
say that uh you know Newtonian physics
that's a powerful tool to model reality
right and it was discovered through
scientific methodology traditionally
speaking no I I'm trying to to answer
that question I think it's rather
apparent where my bias lies what I'm
trying to do is I'm trying to envision
our current technologically saturated
world as if science didn't exist right
and I'm going to this place so I can
answer your question so let's assume my
daughter's 21 for example one day she's
gonna have a daughter I can tell you
that when my grandparents are around
cars were the high tech cars and plans
with a high tech experience for that
generation so you have a lot of
mechanics in that era then a generation
after that computers are getting started
so you had a lot of really solid
engineers of electric engineers and like
the 60s and 80s
rock stars for sure and then with the
software Fey is now my generation we
come in and we understand software
really well my daughter's generation
does not know a damn thing about any of
those three technological platforms she
knows how to swipe her finger on a phone
and she knows how to use that phone to
get the maximum amount of social
attention right so those are the problem
domains that she's been exposed to
inherit grandchild after her child after
that the I don't even think they'll know
computers even exist given the rate
we're going so when when I say when you
say heuristic the ability to kind of
make sense of reality if I'm
interpreting you correctly the kind of
the rule of thumb that states okay
we're gonna take the tools we have the
problems we have and we're gonna solve
it yeah that's effectively what we've
been doing well before you know even
atomic theory well before anything so
that's what we've been doing I think
it's important to step back and realize
ask yourself a question am i framing
this to be scientifically compliant am i
trying to explore this in a way that's
being scientifically compliant and if
the answer is yes great there's nothing
wrong with that it has to be done you
can't just throw that tool out entirely
you still need to use it so what you
want to say in addition to that you want
to say now let's assume I wasn't trained
in science so it's assumed I wasn't
trained than any of this stuff I don't
know anything so effectively everything
is a crazy phenomenon I have no
explanation of it right that's our
original base point for heuristics it's
it's not as if I'm trying to frame the
heuristic to then hopefully find
investment money for my new app or my
new process or my new discovery on on
quantum physics that's a nice little
bolt on what we've been doing since
probably British but before that we've
been trying to solve these complicated
problems in the in the ways we've had
even even without that scientific either
crutch or that scientific focus but
that's scientific discipline or rigor
and it is a Messier process it's a it's
a it's a much messier process now
does that when you sum all that together
does that result in the scientific
method I don't think so I think the
scientific method is unique I think it's
a unique discovery
I don't think if given infinite monkeys
in a room you can heuristic Li come up
with the scientific method I think that
is I think the scientific method is a
result of tremendous abuse from the Holy
Roman Emperor ship and the and the papal
Church I think almost all of scientific
methodology is a reaction against that
tremendously tremendous shitshow of
European history and there's a reason
that you have a lot of the core thinkers
the the primary huge scientific factors
and major players at that time they were
all anti people they saw what the thirty
year war was it was their Holocaust
before the Holocaust they were it wasn't
a war with like soldiers marching in
like like squares and politely shooting
each other it was dragging your
neighbors out of their house and nailing
their kids to a tree it was horrible and
when you go through that for 30 years if
you identify the source of that you're
gonna hate that source for the rest of
your life and the rest of your in your
grandchildren's lives you're gonna pass
that traditional on to say please don't
do that again
like that was the never aroused like the
first never again moment for Europe most
of American history comes from the
founding fathers founding fathers lived
through that war so it's to say that
scientific methodology is like this
heuristic or this sum of heuristics you
have to take it in the time in which it
was formed it was a form of rebellion to
there was a way to rebel against you
know papal Authority and that's baked
into the tradition as well science
doesn't stand alone of the human
experience it is the scientific
methodology is born of the human
experience not just like heuristics it's
born of the political pressures of its
time as well so I think that's that's an
important thing to factor into hopefully
answer your question I agree with that
against them what I'm trying to
establish is that there is sort of a
continuum between science and what it is
you're talking about with looking at
belief and what's called post science
whatever it is I don't I don't know if
there's anything post science I think
science is science
I mean um because you described the fine
herd processes you started with a belief
I pop it fits and then you go towards
divine truth and then I see it's an
axiom right right and your thing that
that is limited it's premature that's
what I'm saying what I'm most but what
this entire talk has been about is
mostly saying okay before we even get to
the hypothesis stage before we even get
there we should probably do this due
diligence first we should incorporate
elements of philosophy of mind we should
bring in epistemology we should we
should bolt that on to the pre
scientific methodology phase that's
effectively what I'm advocating for
because it's it's too quick to jump in
and say whether the the weirdness of the
peer-review system the political
indulgences that exist in academia these
are just these aren't causes these are
just culprits of of when you abuse the
empire of science which has been abused
since the end of World War two at the
advent of nuclear weapons and once well
that's not actually true it goes back to
the British I mean they they horribly
abused their their entropic there's
study of entropy and came up with all
kinds of weapons of war that were
devastating but the I think what you
want to do is kind of instead of going
rushing to the scientific method I'm
recommending a triage phase basically
saying okay hold on back up let's before
we get the hypothesis let's just kind of
really examine our premises here with
with a different look and instead of
tossing belief out the window let's
bring it in you can discount it when you
get that hypothesis cuz you have to
because there's too much economic
pressures you can't just you can't just
like naked Lee Baker belief and
into a hypothesis and just kind of run
with that torch forever you have to do
some due diligence in advance but what
I'm what I'm basically staying is pre
hypothesis let's you know let's define
our terms and let's be adults and bring
belief to the table as well so I'm gonna
just jump in because we're gonna have to
close up right now so packed before I
make some closing announcements do you
have any kind of closing thoughts for us
oh no I think I've spoken enough I thank
you again for all these questions I'm
not actually used to a group Q&A the
first time so this is this has been good
thank you again for listening and
sticking around and kind of working with
me forcing me to reconcile my
epistemological reconciliation machine
thank you awesome awesome
so in a moment I'll make some
announcements about upcoming events but
first Pat thanks so much for coming on
it was greatly appreciated so I'll talk
about the next two events that are
happening tomorrow and you can go to the
the website the stoy dot CA which I put
the chat box so 11:00 a.m. Eastern Time
situational assessment with Jordan Hall
who was the guy again
who coined the blue church he'll be
coming in and doing a Q&A similar to
this format 960 minutes and then at 6
p.m. Eastern Time we have my friend
Daniel who was the co-founder of
soldiers in Toronto he's gonna do a meta
mind
mastermind metagame mastermind
prototyping session I think Daniel
you're in the chat if if you want to
unmute yourself and maybe just give a
little mention on what we're gonna what
we can expect for that yeah so this is
gonna be an exploration on how
accountability groups can help people
maintain their sanity their sovereignty
and actually figure out how to respond
to the kovat and then a cool cool yeah
so I'm definitely looking forward to
that
oops yep I just I'm using myself then I
turn off my video so yeah I'm looking
for that sign up for the mailing list
and I'm viewing the stoah as a gift and
this time I need for all of us to freely
use if you're inspired to provide a gift
to the store just go to the website the
store dossier and look at the gift
economy at the bottom of the page
alright everyone thank you