[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
hey folks
Bret Weinstein here I'm here again with
dr. Heather huiying we are going to
continue to explore the situation that
humanity finds itself in we will as
always take a decidedly evolutionary
viewpoint a couple of pieces of business
to get to before we we hit this
discussion I did a live stream yesterday
I was experimenting with new technology
including super chat and I found myself
very distracted and I wasn't happy with
the product so I'm gonna do a non live
version of it and I will upload that so
that people have access to the content
from the perspective of streams going
forward what we're going to do is we are
going to hold the Super chats until the
end and then we will address the good
super trad questions at the end of it
the dialogue but we're not gonna let it
interrupt what we're talking about which
is good for us because we won't get
distracted and it's good for you because
you won't find the things that you're
interested in listening to disrupted by
questions that are farther afield
alright without further ado dr. Heather
Hynes shall we start a further
discussion of the corona virus and its
effects on humanity yeah
let's do it all right we had said last
time that we were going to move into
talking about effects on society more
broadly we also have a couple of points
that are more strictly biological we
want to speak to and this may not be the
time that we launch into an explanation
of what the fourth frontier
slash game B is oh there's certainly a
lot of interest in that probably not
today
but we do hope to do this maybe weekly
from now on so we'll we'll end up
getting there so you want to start with
the society level stuff or or tell you a
couple things over in biology space
first
well I'm realizing actually seeing the
monitor that there's going to be a
certain amount of jeering at the bandana
that I'm wearing so for those of you who
were not paying attention to the first
live stream I should just say that this
is an epidemiological measure and it's
not that I just like having an excuse to
dress like a cowboy but the the point of
the band
is that I put it on in the morning and
then I use it as needed how effective it
is that's another question you will see
that in the piece I'm going to upload
later on
well the question has been raised as to
whether or not you dress like a cowboy a
or a golden retriever or both
you know perhaps about the best Cowboys
have a touch of golden retriever to them
so anyway you Chaminda take it as you
will
well me let's let's just tell you a
couple points in biology first before we
before we hit Society level stuff given
that maybe we won't we won't start by
showing you the phylogeny of what we
understand about coronaviruses although
that that scientific literature is
somewhat interesting there's a decent
paper published from 2018 on that was
prompted by both SARS one this being
what we're living through right now
being SARS too and MERS is it the one
that comes out of Saudi Arabia and gets
transmitted through by camels to humans
and now people are trying to plug in
basically the molecular phylogenetics
you work on viruses are trying to figure
out where SARS to fits into this and and
that's you know it's interesting for
those of us who like to geek out on that
sort of thing can I just say if you're
watching in Saudi Arabia please put a
mask on your camera yeah definitely
definitely good because the last thing
we need right now is another corona
virus outbreak of a different sort say
so okay how about let's talk about the
likelihood of three three points over in
biology space the likelihood of vaccine
the likelihood that this turns out to
have a seasonal seasonal manifestations
such as it will dip in the summer as we
know from flu viruses which are a
different kind of virus and density
dependence of of this which will explain
when we get there I'm gonna start with
likelihood of vaccine yeah by the way
it's a beautiful list of topics it could
well take up many hours but indeed a
first pass on them so there's a lot of
hopefulness about vaccine emerging and
there is a lot seeming to be banked on
the fact that a vaccine is somewhere
near nearby around the corner
and so if we can just hold out long
enough flatten the curve keep the
medical machinery humming then we can
make it to a vaccine at which point life
goes back to normal
personally let me say I suspect life
never goes back to normal we're not
gonna live in quarantine from here on
out but I think humanity just learned a
very serious lesson about something that
will be much harder to control than we
imagined will there be a vaccine
obviously we don't know but I would say
we don't have a vaccine that works for
the flu in the sense of banishing it
permanently the way we do with smallpox
polio even chickenpox and things like
that so the question about why anyone is
confident that we will have a vaccine
that is both effective and safe and that
we can get there in the short term when
obviously there is a huge amount of
money to be made simply banishing colds
and flu and we've failed at that so far
I would say the likelihood that we get
something that allows us to manage it is
fairly high I don't know on what
timescale but the likelihood that we
just simply banish kovat 19 from the
face of the earth with a vaccine that's
effective and safe and soon seems highly
unlikely one reason that it seems
unlikely is that this is a retrovirus
and a retrovirus means that instead of
the information and remember of virus is
really just two things its information
and a basically self-deploying robotic
coat that allows that information to get
into a target cell and in the case of a
retrovirus reverse transcribe and then
insert into the genome at which point
all of the machinery that does the work
of the virus is the machinery of the
cell that has been hijacked not the
machinery of the virus itself so there's
very little to attack in a virus and in
the case of a retrovirus where the
information is encoded in RNA rather
than DNA which you may remember from
your biology course in high school or
college is that RNA unlike DNA is
single-stranded and because it's
single-stranded now this is a story we
tell ourselves but because of a
single-stranded the mutation rate is
much higher which means that the thing
morphs it
shapeshifter and building a vaccine that
causes the immune system to recognize
the pathogen is difficult if the
pathogen is always changing shape
can I just add why single-stranded RNA
versus double-stranded DNA should have a
higher mutation rate is it the double
stranded nature of DNA is effectively an
error correction mechanism so RNA can
change without there being anything to
correct it that's true that the part of
the story that makes me hesitant is that
this looks very much like a feature and
not a bug and so even the frame the
phrase error correction suggests that
the retroviruses are benefiting from
some sort of an accident rather than an
adaptive process so in any case that's
probably too deep in the weeds but these
viruses that we are facing are highly
effective clearly at spreading they have
two characteristics that make this one
particularly ferocious one of those
characteristics is the long time period
with which the viruses can persist on
surfaces and the other is the
asymptomatic stage in which people are
apparently spreading the disease those
two things make this thing spread like
wildfire the vaccine would be lovely but
it's going to be very hard to create one
I mean notice we also don't have a
vaccine for HIV which is another
retrovirus despite the fact that it
would be a huge boon to humanity and a
huge financial win for whoever came up
with the vaccine so there's lots of
pressure to get one and yet we still
don't have one decades down the road
with respect to HIV this is not to say
that there can't be a virus of course a
vaccine of course but the idea that
anyone any government or any individuals
hospitals or healthcare systems are
pinning all their hopes on the
development of vaccine seems
short-sighted obviously there should
always be plans B through Z in place and
in this case it's not clear to us not as
virologists because we're not Nora's
medical doctors because we're not but as
evolutionary biologists which we are
that a vaccine is the
most likely way to that we will end up
treating treating this virus for the
good of all humanity so we really have
two levels of question with respect to
the situation one is what the hell do we
do now that this thing is loose and
nearly global and the other is what is
the lesson so that this never happens
again and frankly the second of those
questions is a lot more tractable right
we may simply be stuck with ghovat 19
for a goodly long time and we may learn
to manage it the way we now manage HIV
which it's a big cost to the system and
it's terrible for people who get it and
have to be on drugs for their whole life
but nonetheless it is successfully
managed in a way that it wasn't - in
three decades ago yeah and this is like
like HIV this is a zoonotic infection so
donek pathogen and these zone notic
pathogens will continue to emerge we can
do things at the societal level and at
the cultural level to reduce the
likelihood that they do emerge and you
know in the case of corona viruses which
HIV is not I don't think I actually
don't know I don't think so but but this
is and several others are these they
seem to be from one of several species
of bats as Brett addressed last time but
then they live in civets
or camels or maybe pangolins and so you
know what is it that we can do to reduce
the emergence of novel so knotek's into
humans it's not that these viruses
haven't been extent and whatever mammal
species for the most part sometimes
avian species that they've been living
in for however many thousands millions
of years they've been but the idea that
they emerge into humans and are then the
relationship with us is brand-new and
this is part of what is making this so
virulent that we we all of us are naive
with regard to our immune systems and
their ability to recognize this or at
least we were six months ago this is a
quite true I do want to stop at this
point and just say number
one thing on my list for preventing this
from ever happening again would be
taking all of the steps necessary so
that bush meat
is no longer eaten anywhere on earth and
if that seems extreme to you if that
sounds like that's going to have
far-reaching consequences consider the
price that we have paid in living memory
for bush made if kovat 19 has emerged
from either bats or pangolins in a wet
market then we are paying the price the
world has come to a halt we are facing
potentially an economic depression
potentially millions of dead for
somebody's ability to eat a bat or a
Pangolin or something some exotic meat
that is not typically on anybody's menu
but even beyond that there's so know
that aids there's a distinction between
exotic meat and bush meat though so I
think we do need to to play that line
very carefully go on well I'm not I'm
not sure what the distinction is to be
honest with you people certainly don't
generally eat microbat right there are
two large branches of the bat tree the
mega bats the flying foxes the
pteropodidae
are eaten in some places this is a large
enough animal these are frugivores and
people do eat them in places where they
are found but the bat that is or the
clade of bats that it is likely that
kovat 19 came from is a small
insectivorous bat that's not typically
on anybody's menu so it is both bush
meat and exotic now I'm not saying that
this did come through a wet market but
let me just say we also believe that
aids emerged from traffic in chimpanzee
meat now a bola too may be quite likely
yeah so nobody should be eating great
apes for lots of different reasons
there's every reason to conserve them
and I don't mean to fault the people who
are doing the eating or the hunting
although some of them probably deserve a
certain amount of blame other people are
doing this out of desperation or out of
a simple lack of economic opportunities
so I don't I don't want to place blame
but let me just say that from the point
of view of humanity's well-being the
idea that aids that's Casteel what that
one narrowly aids comes out of an
interaction with an individual
chimpanzee chimpanzees are not sick from
HIV but they carry it it jumps to humans
something like 32 million people have
died of HIV so we're talking about a you
know a death toll that's I believe above
the full toll of world war two all the
deaths million Russians but in any case
Humanity is paying an immense price for
this very narrow conduit of contact
between human beings and exotic meat
that is being hunted in the wild we
can't afford this we couldn't afford the
price we've already paid we certainly
can't afford to have a new one of these
emerging every few decades so it's time
to end the bush meat trade and that
means providing the opportunities that
will keep people from exploiting that
one who happened to live close enough to
the forest to hunt there I guess my my
point then would be and probably maybe
this isn't a place for it so the bush
meat trade yes we needed to end and to
the degree that there are people killing
what is exotic to us in the weird world
and the Western educated industrialized
rich democratic nations who are
providing the demand for what seems to
us as exotic meats that needs to stop
and you know anecdotally we saw when
when I was working in Madagascar and
when you were when you were there with
me we saw this not so much in terms of
Bush meatman in terms of the exotic pet
trade where there were people there were
there were Europeans mostly just because
there weren't many americans in
madagascar at this point in the 90s who
were coming in who were paying local
people pittance to go into forests to
ravage them of their populations of it
turns out herps in this case it was
lizards and snakes and frogs for the
most part
and you know good portion of them died
on a road and and this was to service
people's desire to have exotic pets in
their homes similarly and it's a smaller
group of people who can afford to you
know eat Pangolin or whatever exotic
meat they might want on their plates but
it's a it's a well-known let me call it
a fetish of rich European and European
descended types to want to eat meat that
has been caught in rare places you know
there's rare itself in cotton exotic
places and have it on their plate I
don't know I don't know that it's
European but it's definitely a wealthy
thing that people who have the
opportunity to taste exotic things often
want to do it in the price that we pay
is very high well hold on do we know
that anybody eats Pangolin I don't
because we're very popular in the exotic
pet trade and I'm wondering so what was
this penguin doing right anyway yeah
well so people people eat and I agree
with Brett that grapes shouldn't be on
anyone's menu ever all right that's the
chimps bonobos gorillas and orangutans
probably the lesser apes as well the
so-called lesser apes the Gibbons and
Simon and you know I certainly feel like
no primate should be and yet I know that
in many places in the Amazon for
instance primates wild monkey meat is an
important part of the diet of some of
the people who continue to live in the
ways of their ancestors from eight ten
twelve thousand years ago what would it
mean to make a dick taught from up high
to say you can no longer eat primate me
ah I don't know I don't think we have to
first of all there are uncocked
uncontacted people in the Amazon so the
practicality of interfering with that
way of life it's not even available to
us but think about what we're really
talking about we've got populations in
the Amazon that go back maybe ten
thousand or more years they have a
history of hunting the very monkeys that
we're talking about
that means they almost certainly either
have a methodological way of avoiding
disease or a physiological way of
managing the disease in other words
their likelihood of contracting diseases
that have these costs is presumably
quite low
I would certainly bank on the fact that
our isolation from them and their
long-standing proven method for hunting
these particular creatures probably
makes us safe enough it certainly would
not be my focus to worry about the
monkeys they're hunting now there needs
to be a break in the globalization chain
it needs not to hit markets that people
might might pursuit that people might
buy meat at that will then cross borders
there's that and there's just simply it
interacting with the world of people
flying around on airplanes
that's the crossing borders part oh yeah
so a virus can cross the borders not
necessarily the meat yeah but I would
also say even with respect to people
hunting in a ancient fashion deep in the
Amazon for example we are seeing new
problems and you know you and I were
just in the Amazon in the place where
the Irani are the indigenous hunters and
the the place that we were was extremely
remote I mean it's really almost as
remote as you can get there so glorious
there's nothing for many tens of miles
in any direction
other than forests however what we do
see is changes in the biota and this
region as a result of context so there
are laurent II who live on the fringes
of civilization and there are Ronnie who
are uncontacted but there is a flow of
goods in particular there's a flow of
firearms and metal canoes and the
distinction between a forest that has a
motors on the canoes that motorized yes
which makes a huge difference the
difference in the fauna in places where
there is any access at all to firearms
and metal canoes the fauna the large
fauna crashes as a result of the fact
that a tiny number of people using MA
technology can hunt those places out
whereas using ancient technology there's
a natural balance they hunt at a rate it
depletes the populations but the
populations are capable of rebuilding
and you have an equilibrium there so
yeah and it's we're not claiming that
the Huaorani are trying to do the best
thing for the environment you know this
is not a savage noble a noble savage
story right it is simply the fact that
these technologies that they have been
using for thousands of years persisted
in part because they allowed their them
and their prey to be in equilibrium with
one another
those technologies that wiped out their
prey well that prey is no longer there
we don't see it anymore yeah it's the
test of time similarly but here here
would be my point let's say you've got
an uncontacted tribe functioning in an
ancestral way but the effect of firearms
roads motorized canoes begins to deplete
the fauna from their habitat which is
highly likely they are likely to branch
out and start hunting things that would
not be typical for them and so even they
may end up bringing one of these novel
viruses to our doorstep by virtue of
effects that they had no control over
and weren't even aware of just the
simple fact of something that was
ancestor li hunted disappears forces
them to branch out so we really have to
start thinking more holistically about
why we are encountering these things
what happens when one emerges and then
finally ultimately what we do now that
we have one on the loose that seems to
be quite devastating yeah good so we
know that the flu tends to be seasonal
yes right you don't you don't hear about
people getting flu in the summer and
because of the tilt of our planet
and and seasonality that means that when
it's our flu season it's not Australia's
flu season for instance what are the
chances that as has been widely hoped
and again touted as the thing that will
happen
what are the chances that this Tsarskoe
of two is going to be seasonal in this
first season that we've run into it in
this in this first northern summer which
is approaching what are the chances that
will already have a seasonal cyclicity
and go underground for at least a few
months so this is another place where
I'm dubious of people's expectations
because I think they're simply not
thinking in an evolutionary form there
is one way in which it is highly likely
that we will see seasonality and that is
the conditions outside do not appear to
be conducive to the spread and
persistence of this virus so to the
extent that people spend more time
outside when the weather is nice the
virus gets exposed to UV light which is
highly destructive of it we're liable to
see some change in how it gets
transmitted during that period sorry but
you feel like being highly destructive
of it and high temperatures being highly
destructive of it we don't want to mean
to suggest that you should be sticking
UV lights up your nose any more than you
should be sticking hair dryers up your
nose this is not going to help yeah just
just say no and it also it'll it'll
drive off potential mates so ah you know
lots of reasons not to do it but okay so
here's the thing about flu and I'm
reaching deep bleep back into my
education here so if there's new data
I'm unaware of please let me know in
some way or other and I'll update my
model but some years ago I ran into
evidence that the flu had actually it's
always been seasonal apparently but it's
switched seasons and the reason is
likely that human behavior shifted and
so it was true that people imagined
people on the American frontier for
example on the American frontier during
the winter you might be hunkered down
you're not farming right you're just
trying to persist through the winter on
your stored roots and grains and
whatever you might have and you're not
spending a lot of time in town
interacting with other people so from
the point of view of a virus it's not a
very good time to try to spread right
it's effectively social distancing right
but bye-bye culture rather than by dicta
by
it's ecological social distancing at
some level though the weather forces you
into a kind of hiding and then when
people went into town that was a good
time for a virus to move from one house
to the next because people were
interacting it you know the hardware
store and everywhere else okay but then
life changed and fossil fuels happened
or whatever it was that caused people to
be spending more time inside together
during the winter you know imagine a
classroom full of people gathered
studiously working away during the
winter coughing on each other or the
HVAC system transporting it around
whatever the things are that caused
people to concentrate during the winter
in a social form seems to have caused
the flu to move from a summer seasonal
to a winter seasonal for for humans now
again I don't know how true that story
remains but let's just say that it
contains a bit of truth which is that
these viruses what they contain in their
little strip of RNA or DNA is a message
that is built by selection to get this
object deeply into the future that's
what all creatures are trying to do
including viruses so having a
informational packet that causes them to
behave in a way that makes them more
likely to be transmitted is obviously
what is being favored but here's the
kicker because this virus is brand-new
to humanity there is no reason to think
that it has a message that's fine-tuned
about our seasonal behavior so even if
it is seasonal in the bat it came from
if that's where it came from that
doesn't mean it will have a coherent
message with respect to seasonality when
it gets into ourselves for one things
our genomes are different and for
another thing that the physiological
triggers and the behavior of the seasons
is not going to be the same as the back
for a third thing this is spread so
quickly so globally that it is run into
all manner of different seasons climates
weather and population densities so
whatever is going to be most
for the virus imagining that what
adaptive means again is that it can get
itself into the future it's not it's not
trying it doesn't want to kill its host
wants to move into the future that that
will be different in different places
potentially it will be different in
different places now the difficult part
in order to think about this
evolutionarily the difficult part is to
understand that almost every line is a
dead end
right all the kovat 19 that people have
most of it it may get from person to
person to person but then that line will
peter out there's variation in those
lines and some line will prove to have a
brilliant insight about how to get from
A to B you know for example I'm not a
novel writing kind of guy but in my mind
I had the outline for a novel at one
point about a virus that was spread by
Amazon I service right by the service
and the idea was that what you have is
basically a vector service and that a
virus that could be transmitted on boxes
and you know especially you know using
the return service you know you are
scaring people I'm scaring people and
the folks at Amazon are calling up legal
seeing whether I've said something that
could I don't know have me banished from
the earth I guess but just just to flag
this we did point briefly last time to
the idea that the virus can live on
cardboard for up to 24 hours apparently
so one one might if you can wait another
24 hours after getting your Amazon boxes
even though it may be one of the few
inputs from the outside world at the
moment in your life just waiting for 24
hours probably renders any remaining
virus that could have been on those
boxes inactive well okay I want to come
back to the point I was headed towards
but I would say just think okay think
about the object you're looking at how
long it's been since human hands touched
it imagine that the person who touched
coffee
we're coughed right something right the
outer box was touched
within days maybe hours right the inner
box was
probably touched in that same period
inside the inner box has probably been
months since anybody could possibly have
touched it so you know the way to deal
with these things the way we're dealing
with it something arrives we take it
immediately to the garage we take the
thing out of the box we let the boxes
sit somewhere where we're not
interacting with them after we've
extracted the stuff we wash our hands
and then we can pretty much imagine that
the stuff from the inside of the box is
not likely to have anything contagious
on it but anyway the larger point was
okay something could figure out that
Amazon is how we're getting our stuff
right and it could use Amazon to get
from one place to another that would be
truly frightening we can block that
Avenue by dealing really carefully with
the stuff that is transmitted and I must
say before you sue me Jeff Bezos I
should say we're not where is it
Amazon is both a potential hazard here
as a vector or if it behaves itself it's
a potential solution because it's
actually facilitating social isolation
without creating dire consequences so
one of the things that I know we need to
be thinking about is how to be faster
acting and more deliberate when we shut
stuff down to protect ourselves and more
surgical so we don't shut down the stuff
that actually keeps us functional
because we're now created we've we've
set a timer with respect to people's
psychology yes right where they're now
gonna get antsy and that's gonna create
bad effects and a lot of things could be
better managed so that's I mean that's a
great segue to talking about some of the
society level stuff but let's first talk
just a little bit about the apparent
density dependence of both the
likelihood of infection from SARS Cove 2
and the seriousness of the disease so
from the perspective of and so we I
think we just have anecdotal I don't I
haven't seen the statistical analysis
yet of this but health care workers seem
to be getting sick at a much higher rate
than the general population and that
speaks to density dependence of exposure
increasing the likelihood that you will
get sick this is pretty easy to
understand from a statistical
perspective just that you are you you
exposed to more virus over more time
it's more likely that you will make a
mistake and that you will end up in fact
it right so that's this that's nothing
there's nothing surprising if that part
straight part that part is very
straightforward the second aspect of the
apparent density dependence is more spry
surprising harder to explain at a
mechanistic level but something that if
we recognize even if we can't explain it
in terms of what the mechanism is it's
driving it can tell us something about
how we should be behaving which is that
health care workers also seem when they
do get sick to be getting sicker they
are even very you know very healthy
people health care workers in general
are healthy people who are doing their
jobs and when they're coming down with
that they seem to be again anecdotal but
they seem to be getting far sicker than
you know comparable people age-matched
health condition match before they got
sick in in gen-pop in the general
population so what what does that mean
if true that the amount of virus you are
exposed to is actually correlated with
how sick you get in terms of how it
might mean we should be behaving both an
individual on the public health level so
first let me explain why this is
confusing if viruses were toxins then
the more you get exposed to the sick
you're gonna be perfectly
straightforward but that's not what
viruses are viruses like asbestos or let
right density dependence well it's best
this is different because it triggers a
cancer and okay but anyway yeah led or
you know arsenic or whatever the more of
it you get exposed to the more symptoms
you're likely to have in the case of a
virus what we're dealing with is the
rare instance that one of these
particles successfully integrates its
information into your genome and hijacks
a cell that's a rare enough event that
the fact that you were exposed to a
bunch of it doesn't change what should
happen after that one cell jumps the gap
and
or that one virus jumps the gap and
invades a cell so it's kind of a
head-scratcher unless it is mutating so
quickly that the immune system launches
a slightly different response with each
exposure I doubt it I it seems doubtful
because the antibodies that we create
must be somewhat generalizable they
can't be you know completely targeted to
something that hasn't mutated in any way
at all well at some point I think I'm
going to put together a lecture on the
basic immuno biology that underlies our
ability to fight off disease in the
first place so that people can have a
kind of context for this I think I think
it's sort of necessary to get to the the
deeper answer but one aspect of this is
that we have an immune system that is
capable of reacting to absolutely any
the pathogen we might encounter it's not
highly precise when you get the pathogen
anew the system starts to learn it
evolves a new pattern match for the
virus or the bacterium and that's how
you fend it off but part of the if you
maybe that the system in order to
recognize every possible thing you might
encounter is is distributed pretty thin
and so it may be that somebody who's
been exposed to a big load overwhelms
that part of the immune system that is
actually anywhere in range and so
something along these lines may be
resulting in that paradoxical dosage
dependent degree of illness so might an
analogy be that within the body all of
the workers are doing triage and no one
is allowed to specialize and figure out
the solution yeah something like that
yeah or you know you're so overwhelmed
that that themselves are doing jobs for
which they're not very well matched or
something like that once forced into
being a generalist all the cells are
forced into being a generalist when what
you need is actually for some of them
some of the cell lines to be going deep
to develop the antibodies to give you
the immune response that you need right
but there is a message
here right for one thing a I should say
after our first live stream we got a
number of messages from people who had a
story similar to yours about an illness
that they had in January or February
which they did not understand to be
covered 19 but in retrospect looks like
it may well have been there's also a lot
of evidence emerging of these non of
these non symptomatic infections which I
may have had you were sick or maybe I
didn't get it but but these non
symptomatic infections have a kind of
dual meaning to us on the one hand
they're very serious because if you're
non symptomatic but you're spreading
this thing you're you know you're a
hazard to those around you you know you
may not have any negative consequences
but you could spread it you know to your
grandmother and kill her right so that's
very serious from an epidemiological
point of view on the other hand to the
extent that what is going on is that
there is variation in the virus and that
some versions of it are causing less
serious infections or that somebody gets
a low dosage and they have a completely
manageable infection there in that
somewhere is two kinds of hope one of
the kinds of hope is that the virus will
quickly evolve to a more manageable
state that it will be less deadly
because as pathogens tend to as they
tend to automatically because it's not
good for them to be killing people who
can no longer spread the virus and the
other thing is that it may be that
there's variation in the human
population which leaves a lot of people
immune or near immune to this and in
both places
evolution can produce a a more navigable
scenario but here's the the one that's
most troubling and the one that I'm most
concerned people will take the wrong way
this is speculation and I would really
like to hear somebody epidemiologically
you know an epidemiologist respond to
this but an asymptomatic infection is
effectively a vaccine right now that may
not be true as Heather mentioned on our
last live stream there are diseases like
dengue that you can get twice and in
fact the second time you get it it's
much more devastating than the first
time so it's possible that this is like
an inverse vaccine but to the extent
that immunity arises out of exposure
then you know I mean in fact Edward
Jenner when he invented the first
vaccine that Europeans had he used
smallpox
he used cow pox
to generate immunity by administering
effectively milkmaids he had noticed
weren't getting smallpox and they did
get cow pox which was a non-lethal
infection so anyway the question is and
you know this is obviously tied up in
the herd immunity that is being widely
discussed but some fraction of us seem
to be getting the disease without
getting the symptoms and they are
effectively vaccinating through a non
technical mechanism at the same time
they may be spreading disease to other
people so I'm not advocating anybody
pursue the disease again caveat that
having had it and having antibodies to
it is actually protective and provides
immunity as opposed to actually puts you
at further risk for which there's just
an asterisk we just don't know there
have been a couple of reports out of I
think it's Taiwan that suggest the
dengue model yeah it'd be interesting to
see if anybody sees that pattern
elsewhere yeah it's really a vital piece
of information to know 100% oh one other
point I wanted to make there sorry I
don't want to be in hog in the space I
want people to notice the following odd
fact that seems to have nothing to do
with the situation at all despite the
fact that we sometimes say sick is a dog
an expression I've never understood dogs
do not get illnesses that they
transmitted to people now this is a very
interesting anomaly because we can get
obviously if kovat 19 from a bat that's
a pretty great phylogenetic distance for
that virus to have jumped we certainly
get flus from birds that's a much wider
gap for viruses to jump so it is readily
possible for viruses to jump between
very distantly related creatures the
fact that we don't get or that we don't
give colds and flu to our dogs and they
don't give it to us is a conspicuous
fact also true for caps there's one
thing that we do get from cats which is
toxoplasmosis which is a whole other
situation but and obviously rabies can
go between dogs and people there's
there's this one brutal fatal disease
that can go between dogs and humans but
it always comes with manifestations it
comes with symptoms yeah now actually
this is the perfect segue because you
and I had a very jarring experience in
Madagascar once when rabies began to
spread in the dog population in the area
that we were in Martin cetera yeah and
we came to town without knowing what was
going on just like I was working on an
island off the coast and we'd come into
town every two-and-a-half weeks or so to
re-up our rice supply and get tomato
salad basically when we came into town
at this at this one point we encountered
a dead dog by the side of the road that
was not in and of itself all that
unusual but then we encountered another
and another and another the entire town
was filled with them yes there were
hundreds hundreds of dead dogs just
lying on the road and and in the night
they came the the sanitation workers
came and cleaned them all out they've
killed them they put out poisoned food I
think wasn't me one night and then and
they were left all day in the tropical
Sun and then we happened to be there
during that day and then they came that
night and scooped them all up so anyway
the way this all links up is there's no
obvious reason that dogs should be
immune to human flu and colds and if you
think about it wouldn't it be a target
for flu and colds to get into dogs to
move from one person to the next you
know one person interacts with the sick
dog they get the disease they give it to
a few people those people give it to
their dogs it would be an extra way for
a virus to move around so what I'm
guessing has happened is that when dogs
have gotten sick with something people
are sick with my guess is people have
killed them and they've started over
which has selected for immunity to those
things and the reason I raise it here is
that what I don't think we're doing
enough of is considering you know we're
trying to behave in ways that prevent
the disease from spreading that's very
good that's the right thing to be doing
but we also ought to be managing how the
pathogen evolves so that it moves in a
direction that becomes more tolerable
and I confess I don't know how to do
that but it does seem that our ancestors
may have handed us dogs that have
exactly the kind of immunity that we are
seeking for ourselves it almost
certainly took harsh measures to get
there and so you know self quarantine
self-isolation this this flatten the
curve but it's very very hard on almost
everyone but it's a lot less harsh than
killing all your pets yeah which may
well be how we ended up with dogs that
don't seem to trance be able to transmit
anything to us other than rabies yeah
all right
what are we at timewise ech
okay do we want to continue on or we as
they're super chat stuff or maybe we
should I think we've covered a lot of
territory it'll take people some time to
digest it okay so let me let me just let
me tag what some of the things we'll be
doing next time so that we actually do
it since we sort of promised a society
level analysis last time and we didn't
get there so we want to talk a little
bit about conspiracy theories that are
out there about this why public works or
the answer or something like the WPA
from the 40s 50s 40s 50s thirties well
we're and why social distancing measures
that are in place which are important
should not be conflated with stay at
home and you know unfortunately some
local governments are actually keeping
people out of public natural places in
the state of Oregon all the state parks
are closed including a many hundreds of
acres Park it's walking distance from
our home which is frankly insane so
we'll get we'll get back to some of
those implications on our next one but
let us yeah one more piece of business
it occurs to me so we when we were
teaching it at Evergreen we made a point
when we had made errors in a
presentation to come back and clean them
up later yeah you and I each made an
error at least at least one each at
least one yes feel free to call our
attention to others so let me let me
start I said that dengue wasn't a virus
and it is I didn't know what it was it's
a virus so there's that yep so I should
say as you said that I was shocked to
hear that dengue wasn't a virus and I
briefly thought there might be a major
hole in my education but anyway it turns
out it's a virus and I said that an
acorn was not a nut and it turns out
acorns are of course nuts so turns out
to have been a nutty position yes it was
it was a non nutty position but in a bad
way yeah all right super chats so I
don't some number of viewers including
myself until three days ago know
what a super chat is he want to say what
this is I'll thought maybe it doesn't
matter yeah yeah super chats are
questions that people have paid to
elevate to our consciousness Zak we got
to see it there you go no we can see it
again so this is our awesome
fifteen-year-old son Zachary doing tech
support for us Thank You Zach I will
have to change the timing of these ones
school start up again alright I can get
you to do our tech work so Myles has
told us that Heather's voice is very
soothing to hear Thank You Myles and I
must say I feel the same way and have
for a long time I'm very glad you
continue to feel that yes yeah it's a
good thing especially in lockdown like
this right okay
second is this going to end up like
chickenpox we encourage our children to
get it early well it's a good question
we're talking about chicken pox at
dinner last night with our children we
were now I must say chicken pox is a
it's a little bit of a dicey call
because on the one hand the reason that
when we were kids parents the wisdom
amongst certain parents was that you
should encourage your kid to get chicken
pox so they get it early because getting
it late can be deadly so there was a
reason to get it but of course there is
also a serious downside to having had
chicken pox ever which is Fingal's which
is the same I guess it's varicella virus
which reimburses from hiding I would
also point out as a biologist who
specializes in trade-offs that's just
the cost we know about we don't know
what other costs there might be of
having this virus latent for your whole
life so chicken pox
was a case in which medical judgment
amongst some people suggested getting it
early was a good thing because it
prevented you from getting it late this
is another case where the the virus
itself is sort of functioning as a
vaccine in this case people having
parties to convey the disease to their
kids now we have a vaccine for
chickenpox I'm going to annoy people by
pointing out that we do not we cannot
based on the way these things are tested
have good information on the full
downside of
the vaccine it just hasn't been around
long enough for us to know and my strong
suspicion would be that we are not
tracking cases well enough to know what
happens to people in their 70s 80s 90s
who have had the vaccine but nonetheless
we now have a vaccine which appears to
give us an even better solution to the
chickenpox problem which is to prevent
you from ever getting yet rather than
giving it to you as a child that
prevents you from getting it late and
suffering a serious harm or getting
shingles late which is survivable but by
all accounts are quite terrible
condition to face I don't know the
answer to the question of are we going
to encourage people to get it early if
our family had it the case Zach had was
not a minor thing yep so it may be that
the that the pattern that we come to
ultimately recognize is that this is not
as benign in young people as we think it
is or it may evolve to be different over
time that's right so if we're gonna get
through these within 15-20 minutes we
should I don't know if we are some of
these aren't questions I don't think we
really need to read those out loud
should we stop eating human meat - yeah
I think that's a good idea yes thank you
for that question I have certainly
stopped yeah long time ago yep so next
one but what if it mutates what is the
likelihood that SARS - might mutate so
significantly during this outbreak that
we have to make serious changes and what
we do with societies to fight it well I
think it doesn't have to mutate for that
to be the case I think that we that we
will change what we do is fight yes and
this is this is where some of where
we'll get to next time yeah up at the
top I said I don't think things ever go
back to normal
and I really believe that whether or not
I mean one of my fears having now seen
people respond to Cove at 19 this is the
first time in my life that I have seen
society having a proper discussion about
infectious disease how its transmitted
what behavioral changes you can make
it's the first time in my life the last
thing I want is for the discussion to go
back to normal right but I don't think
life is going to go back to normal and
because I think
we've just learned is that we have we've
acquired a new what shall I call it a
stowaway we've acquired something as
dangerous and indeed much more dangerous
than the flu at this point and as far as
we know we are stuck with that new
fellow traveler we cannot afford to keep
acquiring new ones the burden to
humanity of having another phenomenon
like the flu traveling at the same time
the flu hasn't gone anywhere that's
devastating we can't keep doing this so
I do think that this is going to result
in major alterations to the way
civilization functions and the good part
of it is that hopefully it has
permanently upgraded our discussion so
that we can behave in a more reasonable
fashion with respect to not spreading
disease to each other for individuals it
was a kind of Epidemiology school
assuming things return to something like
what we recognized from before and at
the society level it is revealed so much
of the fragility in across all levels in
society that perhaps perhaps we can
begin to have that conversation is that
can you scroll up so we can see we don't
know what we've done yet you need to can
you okay please try to ant you go ahead
please try to answer Zach please try to
answer if a person is asymptomatic and
tests positive how long are they likely
to continue to be able to carry Kovan to
others we don't know but something you
know potentially a couple weeks is the
short answer well so I would say this is
one where what we need is the best
experts we've got to answer that
question directly we're not in a
position to do it we don't have a lab we
don't study Cove at 19 but knowing the
answer to that question and then knowing
the answer to how persistent these
things actually are and that's a data
that's going to have to continue to be
taken because they can mutate and change
in
in response to our behavior so we don't
know the answer to the question but I
would say you definitely want to err in
the direction of staying away and you
know I'd say a couple weeks at a minimum
and then there's the question of if
you're contagious for a couple of weeks
and you call on something and it can
remain live on a certain amount of what
you've coughed on to for another week or
more you're talking about a long period
of infectiousness yeah so I just want
logisitics question between the three of
us in this room I'm not sure we're
generating more questions that we're
taking so long with each I'm not sure
we'll ever be done here so I don't know
if we stopped super chat or it's some
dough now to stop answering the
questions okay are we still at the top
here are we still or did you scroll down
okay even the guys hope you're both well
in the long term how do you think our
society and politics will change fallen
epidemics tech decline can we go there
next time yep
thank you for the question for next time
I'm not gonna read the next one it's
rude can you give a quick rundown oh no
no no no no really why is it you dress
like John Wayne sidekick first of all
not like John Wayne sidekick right I am
dressed like a bandit in my own right
and that is because inside of every nice
Jewish boy there's a cowboy trying to
get out everybody knows that Wow right I
didn't yeah okay well the roller was I
didn't I wasn't raised in a Jewish home
so you know there's that's a problem in
my own education ya know the answer is
at the top of the live stream this is an
epidemiological measure you can see
Joseph Walker the Jolly swagman himself
who is in Australia
tweeted a picture of himself in a
hardware store mask this morning a
hardware store mask is a dim shadow of
this I've run a test this blocks almost
all photons that are incident and likely
his highly effective against virus on
that same basis so anyway we will talk
about that later but this is an
epidemiological measure and I recommend
you get one too all right can you give a
quick rundown your own mental health as
it relates to this global pandemic I
would be curious how it has impacted you
emotionally
you know we're lucky we have a beautiful
home in the forest and there are four of
us living here and we all love each
other and like each other we do not
always come together in the same
relationships we have been able to spend
time outside we ordered 16 cubic yards
of a combination of mulch and soil and
rocks as this thing is it was looking
like we were going to lock down so
Brett's been digging trenches and I've
been digging holes and getting the boys
to dig holes and smother a landscape
with with mulch and soil and we get
outside we get moving it's it's not easy
but if if there was anything that you
can do to do physical work honest good
physical activity together do it I would
also say I'm noticing a pattern in
myself and in some others that I'm
encountering which is that for some
people crisis fills you with a sense of
purpose and it actually gives you a
pretty good idea of what you're supposed
to be doing and so as much as I find our
collective predicament frightening there
is also an aspect of this which is
keeping me very busy and I I feel okay
and I think you know if you're if you're
feeling that too it's not something to
be embarrassed about
we'll also say that in my traverse of
various hardware stores I have noticed
many more people than normal who appear
to be involved in do-it-yourself home
projects which you should be very
careful getting the materials for it but
I think it's a it's a healthy outgrowth
of this people are getting to some of
the stuff they never got to before
because they're spending more time at
home this is not necessarily the moment
to learn how to use power tools because
this is exactly the not the moment that
you want to end up in a hospital for
some non koban 19 related injury but but
if you can do so safely
it's a fabulous moment to get that sort
of thing done I feel like you scrolled
past some ones that we missed SEC
Japan azad was infected early did almost
nothing to stop the virus now has very
few cases or deaths can you explain why
masks is one thing it's it's there's no
no social stigma against wearing masks
yeah there there's a lot here it could
be something in Japanese culture I don't
want to this is a dangerous topic
because to the extent
anything could be resident somebody's
culture speculating about it is liable
to leave you offending somebody but it
could be Japanese fastidiousness it
could be the lack of a social stigma
around masks it could be given the blood
type appears to be an issue it could be
that there's something in the Japanese
population sure the question again Zach
just go back to the the previous one did
almost nothing to stop the virus so I
don't know beyond this question what it
did or did not do it not familiar but
did it leave its borders open it left
its airports open it restricted travel
from only to Chinese provinces I believe
okay so airports open is obviously a
huge on the other hand it is it is an
archipelago so any place where there's
no land-based
you know border crossing potentially if
the airports were opened there was no
checking that doesn't help but in
general an island nation should be
better able to deal with such a thing
I'm speaking off the top of my head here
that I do think that they checked
people's temperature from the beginning
yes yeah which wouldn't catch
asymptomatic cases I would write they
did have a case I believe one of these
cruise ships that was just thoroughly
infected with the stuff docked on their
Shores but anyway it's a very good
question and there are really two kinds
of answer is it something Japan did or
is it something about Japanese
physiology in either case it would be
very good to know there are companies in
China that have commercialized Cova 19
and immunoglobulin M and I guess that is
in home testing kits cost around $10
that's an observation that someone has
made it's not a question it's
great if true yep great if true oh I
love the next question and we don't have
the time to do it here but I would
gladly this is something I used to teach
on all the time what determines close to
us he said the bats are not as close as
birds why oh yeah the why is that bats
and humans have a more recent common
ancestor than humans and birds do and I
can show you phylogenetic trees all day
and walk us through both the philosophy
of science of that and the science of
science of that but that will be a
separate separate I don't know podcast
something at some point but we but we
know we are almost certain around the
dates of the most recent common ancestor
for all mammals being something between
100 and 200 million years ago and the
the last time that our ancestor was
closely relate to a bird was well before
200 million years ago all right this
next one is interesting the Steelman
podcast that's you go from the bottom
wait at the top what percentage of the
u.s. population do you think has or is
currently infected no idea I would say
the discovery that the virus was
apparently spreading in January and
February at a much higher rate than we
knew says you know the old adage that
early reports are always wrong in this
case we may still be in the early
reports phase so stay tuned yeah that we
we continue to have the denominator
problem for sure with regard to things
like the case fatality rate probably
being over reported which is good news
because we aren't testing sufficiently
to know what the denominator there
should actually look like on the other
hand there are there are plenty of
plenty of cases all over the world that
are yet to be tested it's really not but
okay okay next one is a tricky one if
dislocations persist will be easier to
implement apparent solutions that may
become net negative how do you think
about this about encountering a
Weinstein's gate the obverse of
Chesterton
fence so I have a feeling that this is
deriving from a discussion in one of my
patreon groups a monthly discussion
could you leave that up please act not
scroll past the one we're on so this is
a tough one Chesterton's fence is a GK
Chesterton's what would you call it
parable - executor
why you shouldn't eliminate measures
that whose functionality you don't
understand he says so we've just written
about this actually until one of the
early chapters of the book that we're
writing you you run into a fence and
it's in your way or you find it
irritating for some reason and you want
to get rid of it and you say to your
friend I'm gonna get rid of this fence
and your friend says to you what's it
for I don't know I want to get rid of it
until and unless you can describe
accurately what it's for you should not
be allowed to disrupt it take note of it
not knowing what it's for suggests it
may be for something you don't know
anything about so I don't know how to
answer the question I think generally I
would like some sort of brain trust to
be thinking about the deeper strategic
implications of how we behave at the
moment the fact that the political
apparatus has become aware that there is
something that it is responsible for
dealing with that's good but the
strategy itself is pretty thin and a lot
of the tools were using are quite blunt
so what I would love to see is a room
full of people who are not responsible
to the public on a daily basis
explaining what they're doing thinking
about the deeper strategy and what what
might actually function so that we don't
implement measures that are negative in
the end but seem you know give the
political class cover you know that sort
of thing
how likely is it that this virus escaped
from China's only level 4 virology lab
which happens to be in Wuhan this is a
great question I am NOT an expert in
things Wuhan virology labs
any of these things but I will say much
depends on what the data that we have
available to us actually means in other
words somebody could have created a hoax
or so let me say to that we are going to
speak specifically to some of some of
the conspiracy theories out there yeah
but no conspiracy conspiracy theory has
a bad name because a lot of them are
tinfoil hat style ridiculousness which
is some of what we'll be talking about
but also conspiracies happen therefore
some conspiracy theories are true so
calling this a conspiracy theory is not
a value judgment about it's nonsensical
mess I would say we should call it a
conspiracy hypothesis for lots of
reasons that I will cover elsewhere
conspiracy theory would be a conspiracy
that's actually happened and we can be
sure of it which has happened a great
many times it's not going to catch on
though but I must say I am quite
troubled by the possibility that given
that there is a virology lab apparently
you know I could discover that I have
bad information here but if there's a
virality lab that was studying corona
viruses in bats in Wuhan obviously it's
highly likely that something happened
either as an accident somebody was
careless in the lab or they were playing
around with something
do I want responsibility for advancing
that idea into the world absolutely not
because it could well be you know there
are lots of ways this could work but I
do think we have to worry about it and
among the many things among the many
messages that are clear is that the
ability to wreak havoc on planet Earth
exists in the pathogens of wild
creatures that is a lot of power to
place in the hands of people who do not
have our
long-term well-being at heart and so
there is no solution to that that
involves personal responsibility that
involves nations navigating this each
according to their own rules this is
something that has to be dealt with as a
result of the fact that we have a
collective interest in not having more
diseases emerge from from animals into
the human population is Zach fascinated
by evolutionary biology - or did growing
up with a double dose of it in the
family numb him to the phenomenon well
is that we got the expert on Zach in the
room what's the answer man I don't know
yeah okay but to some degree his brother
is more than naturalist and he's more of
a engineer but I think they're they're
both interested they're not numbed
I hope yeah give them time yeah you said
in your podcast with Eric Bret Hart's
don't recover like other organs so they
were adaptive reasons for it yep okay we
got two of these you said in your
podcast with Eric that hearts don't
recover like other organs so that there
were adaptive reasons for it I heard
that Kovan may cause heart damage what
are those reasons let me give the quick
and dirty version yep your heart is a
very special organ it's a pump that
doesn't fail even once in a proper life
of 80 maybe a hundred years right that's
a remarkable kind of machine
it functions unlike a machine pump that
we would create in other words it has
lots of circulation within it and the
vessels in the heart are vulnerable to
being blocked by a growth that wouldn't
bother you if it were in your liver
you'd never know it was there and so my
hypothesis from the paper that I wrote
many years ago on this topic is that the
low tolerance that the heart has for a
growth of cells out of place has caused
the dial on tumor prevention to be
turned all the way down so you don't get
a little pea-sized blockage in a in a
artery that causes your heart to fail
and the turning down the self repair
capacity
prevents those growths from happening
but it leaves the heart very vulnerable
to toxic insult and other things and so
one pattern we have seen here which I
must say I I didn't have a good reason
for imagining it but it definitely has
me worried was the NSAIDs the
non-steroidal anti-inflammatories I know
from my own work on telomeres and
pharmaceuticals that they have all been
shown to do heart damage of one kind or
another I absolutely avoid these things
I take aspirin which humans have a long
history rarely with I take it very rare
let's take us any of this very often but
if I can't take aspirin for some reason
I'll take tylenol tylenol which is not a
safe drug it's a dangerous drug but at
least we think that the damage that it
does is to your liver and the damage it
does to your liver is liver is capacity
you can afford to spend so and that's
what livers our livers our detoxifying
organs yeah so in any case the fact that
kovat 19:00 has been made worse
apparently by the other the NSAIDs is
pretty pretty interesting but anyway I
think generally what we're detecting is
that because of the way the heart is
built it is very vulnerable to insults
of all kinds covered 19 being one kind
of insult and seds being another kind of
insult the combination of them being
particularly bad but we should expect
this from here on out which is that many
things that are really bad for us are
especially bad for our hearts yeah good
thanks for the content level listening
to the two of you thank you what's the
economic what's the economic trade off
between constantly keeping the country
and locked down and risking a second
wave versus opening up the country again
and just letting everyone get infected
and building immunity exactly well I
mean I think you've stated the trade off
there rather well and the answer is
there's a huge amount of uncertainty
around what this virus will do if left
to its own devices and what it will do
under
the kind of crude management that we are
deploying but let me say that the virus
today is not inherently the same thing
as the virus even in three weeks or
three months and certainly not in three
years and no one's expecting a lockdown
for three years that's obviously not
tenable but the longer the longer time
period during which we can socially
distance and work to flatten the curve
the more chance that we are that that we
have that a our health systems don't get
overwhelmed of course but that there
might be developments with regard to
either prophylaxis to keep you from
getting it or a vaccine so the
distinction being a somewhat subtle one
but for instance there's no vaccine for
malaria but there is prophylaxis that
variably works or drugs to treat so also
the virus you know the longer it exists
with us likely the less virulent it gets
so it is far better if you're going to
get this to get it later than to get it
now and so trying to fast forward her an
immunity right now is a much more
dangerous prospect that imagining that
even if all of humanity ultimately ends
up getting exposed it would be over a
longer period of time yeah so actually
we should put together a list of the
reasons that getting it later would be
positive um one of them if you mentioned
it I'm sorry for repeating it but just
the simple fact that we will know a lot
more about what to do you know there'll
be less burden on the system and we'll
know more what to do is probably reason
reason enough in and of itself there
will be more data on every front and you
know especially once there are serology
tests man just beating this drum like I
did in the last live stream we did but
once their antibody tests and we can
actually have an answer to the question
that was asked earlier about how many
people have likely been exposed and
therefore tracking those cases that
weren't identified as Co vat19 were
symptomatic but turned out to be cope at
19 and beginning to put those data
together into an epidemiological
analysis such that you know is is this
thing where you begin to feel better and
feel like you're better and then it hits
you hard is is that really something
that this that this disease is doing to
people reliably the more people who
know that if it is true the better the
more lives will be saved I would say
though if we step back a little bit it
is also important that we learn how to
manage let's say that kovat 19 continues
on a pace without a seasonal reprieve
let's say I expect to season a reprieve
for one set of reasons not for another
but nonetheless let's say it didn't
figuring out how to operate in the world
so you can get the things done that you
need to get done that's gonna be
something we're gonna have to do and
we're gonna discover a lot of things you
know if this doesn't work we'll find out
if it does work it's good to know and
maybe we will discover that we all you
know do the same way we put on a shirt
in the morning we need to do something
to prevent spreading airborne diseases
but we're gonna have to learn those
things we're gonna have to get more
surgical about what activities we
sideline and what activities we upgrade
so that we can do them during an
epidemic like this but you know
ultimately we're gonna have to learn to
manage it this is for Zach awesome work
awesome
in C you just scrolled up we can't see
the next question yeah might prolong
social distancing reduce it was up
farther kiddo that went up top can you
show me okay in most countries the ratio
of positive cases to total test it
reduces as tests go up absolutely this
is the denominator problem document he
says he or she says UK Sweden Denmark
went down from 10 to 5 percent in the
last 10 days the u.s. is study at 16
percent even though testing is
increasing any idea why testing is
increasing but it's not increasing
enough and anecdotally I've heard a
number of stories of people being told
by doctors yes this is you almost
certainly have this but we don't have
enough tests so I want you to quarantine
at home and come back in
if you absolutely need to but we're not
even going to test you
so even symptomatic cases aren't always
being tested from the US I don't know
that that isn't happening elsewhere but
I know that that is happening in the
u.s. I would say I don't want to allege
anything but there is a danger about
monkeying with baseline in order to
adjust the way a particular crisis is
understood I don't know whether I
suspect that did happen is it still
happening I don't know but the data
hasn't settled down because in some
sense it's spotty and yeah I guess we'll
see as the data gets better what the
pattern really is yep okay the next one
we already answered you know how much of
the data coming from China should we
believe considering the pandemic was
caused by their lies in the first place
thanks for Montreal well I don't stumped
us yeah I don't know how to answer that
for one thing I don't know which lies
you're talking about can we see the
question thanks good
you know it's too much of a hot potato I
don't I don't want to we've got too much
variance on what may have happened we've
got everything from a natural escape
from bush meat at a wet market to
virology lab that you know in the worst
case was creating a bioweapon we don't
know what took place so it makes it very
hard to calibrate what was being said I
do think there's you know what has there
been mismanagement on the part of as far
as we can tell every government pretty
much yeah have there been active lies
coming out of China probably and in the
u.s. saying the pudendal was penned emic
was caused by their lies is for me a
bridge too far I'm not prepared to go
there I'm not saying it couldn't be true
but I haven't seen the evidence for it
all right do you think societies require
a specific catastrophe per generation to
educate them to that specific if you
you know I think in some sense this is
what this is one of the things that
enduring art is for is to preserve an
understanding of catastrophe so not
everybody has to experience it directly
that said as you will see in the book
that that we are producing novelty is a
massive problem for us evolutionary
novelty and the problem with our
catastrophes is that they are taking on
a new nature right so obviously
airplanes are playing a role in this
epidemic that is relatively new now
obviously that those airplanes have been
spreading lots of less serious diseases
for a long period of time and obviously
HIV was transported on airplanes but but
nonetheless the problem is that our
transporter and airplanes have
presumably not transmitted much well
that really depends but no I meant
transported just so yeah gonna jump
oceans in a way that's you know it's
become trivial but in any case the
problem is that our catastrophes have so
much new content that the stories that
should be protecting us from them
haven't been written yet and at one
level if you want a really depressing
idea we have to get over the idea that
stories are about entertainment and that
we should be hearing stories that make
us feel good and happy and the point is
stories actually are they are adaptive
and we have hijacked them for
educational purposes but it is time that
our stories take on an impactful
responsibility I love this idea we've
talked about it before if this is what
enduring art is for right and so you
know the Russians seem to have gotten
this Tolstoy and Sultanate's in both you
know war and peace and the Gulag
Archipelago both clearly described in a
way that is accessible for for most
people some of the horrors that that
occurred in 19th and 20th century Russia
and in Soviet Union and you know
Guernica yeah there there it's not just
it's not just through narrative it's
also through two-dimensional
three-dimensional art that we end up
being able to understand some other
piece of humanity that we have not
ourselves lived through this is this is
what art is and it's it's part of why we
need it thank you again to Zak wonderful
thank you
my prolonged wow that's very generous
that's Lee thanks so much Lee might
prolonged social distancing reduce herd
immunity to other pathogens resulting in
for example a very very bad influenza
season in the future I actually wanted
to cover this topic roughly let me look
at the my prolonged sources in it let's
let's introduce the question in the
following way and maybe we can address
it next time the question is now that
humanity has upgraded its response to
infectious disease sort of all of a
sudden we took a crash course
what will the evolutionary response of
the flu itself be my guess is that flu
is having a very hard time transmitting
in the period since people have started
wearing masks so anyway there's some
whole thing to to address which is what
do we do and what is the evolutionary
response of the pathogen and given
whatever that pattern is can we manage
these things into a better state for us
the way our dogs were apparently managed
or potentially managed by our ancestors
to make them such good companions yeah
it's a great question and it speaks to
the actual interconnectedness that as
you know it is been observed widely at
this point that most countries in the
world right now could not withstand
effectively a natural disaster or
another or another widespread pathogen
so we are acting we are coming together
to some degree over this we're still
acting as if this is the thing this is
the enemy from outside that we have all
been waiting for to bring us together
well it's not the only thing and there
will be there will be downstream and
negative effects of even the best
the best rot procedures here all right
you said in the last podcast that
authorities weren't telling us the whole
truth or or we're hiding something can
you elaborate I could tell you but then
they'd have to kill me all right that's
good
you know no I would say we'll get to
this a little bit next time maybe this
is always a feature which is that they
have perverse incentives with respect to
telling us the whole truth there's
always this idea that we can't handle it
and that we will panic and that that
will make things worse which is almost
always a prelude to things being done
not on our behalf and then in this case
there's a question about there's a kind
of a hot potato of responsibility and in
particular I'm worried about baseline I
want to know what's actually going on so
that we can navigate in something other
than a blind fashion and the political
apparatus is obviously aware that it is
going to be held accountable and that
there are things that can do that will
make it look like it actually performed
better than it did good this guy wants
Brett you just send him some DNA so he
can create a bunch of ice cream with his
jeans we are sexually reproducing so I
don't think Brett's DNA is going to be
sufficient but yeah thank you for
everything
love you guys also the guy's name seems
to be male so it's we you can't you
can't combine sperm with sperm it
doesn't work no it needs equal that's
odd but I mean it works it just doesn't
produce babies yeah
also flattening the curve buys us time
to get masks into the hands of every
person true and to get those supply
chains back up that production back up
ventilators respirators but but masks
into the hands of every person very good
point I suspect masks may be a major
cause the difference between USA Italy
and Japan South Korea yeah I think I
think that's likely right and the and
the pre-existing cultural norm around
putting on masks whenever you are sick
or whenever there is understood to be
some kind of outbreak agreed but you may
think my bandana looks stupid but
honestly I did a test I took my camera
and I pointed it at a video light and I
set the a si
the shutter speed and the aperture to a
proper exposure and then I put my
bandana over it and it absorbed 999
photons out of a thousand okay now that
is not exactly the number of viral
particles I would expect it to intercept
but it is not I can't think of a good
reason and all the studying I've done of
the you know physics and the like I
can't think of a good reason to think
that the bandana should automatically be
vastly less effective at trapping
viruses than it is of trapping photons
there's one reason that it should be
less effective which is as you create
negative pressure behind the bandana you
breathe in the particle could snake
through multiple holes and it could
reach you on the other hand these viral
particles a even just the viral particle
is much bigger than a photon B they're
not travelling in isolation they're
travelling water droplets which are much
bigger and have an affinity for the
fabric that the bandana is made out of
so by affinity and I actually saw this
question on Twitter at some times like
why why would you want to attract it
into a fabric the virus stays sort of
active and on the surface of hard
surfaces like steel and plastic but into
fabric it basically it's the coat around
the actual RNA gets tangled and stuck
and deactivated and so it's not that
that happens right away or to everything
and if you touch your bandana right
after you get contact you could you
could give it to yourself yeah but in
general fabrics tend to trap the virus
and then if you wash those fabrics
quickly with soap and hot water you will
deactivate them and wash them away yeah
and I do I wash my bandana sometimes I
put on two at different times during the
day or if I haven't really been out I'll
have one but I wash it and I don't put
them back on but think about it just at
a mundane level let's say you spill take
a bandana spill some coffee on it
right you're talking about a suspension
of particles inside of water that's what
the coffee is it gets on your bandanna
how much of it comes off on your fingers
when you touch it very little so you're
not it's not a perfect measure I
guarantee you but how good a measure is
it it's likely to be very good if this
isn't true and
but he understands the reason that isn't
true I want to hear it but here's my
point let's say that my test with my
camera
he is wildly off right and it
overestimates the effectiveness by an
order of magnitude that would still
leave at 99 percent effective at
trapping viral particles 99% effective
is mighty effective frankly I'd take 60%
right but 99% that's awesome so my
expectation is that this works it
certainly does not reduce my vigilance
on any other front but what I would say
is you don't need a mask designed for
the purpose you just need something that
does the job I know lots of people have
put out videos on YouTube about how to
make a mask for yourself do you have one
in your drawer already maybe you do
somebody should be studying whether
these things are actually effective so
that we know that when things happen
we're not dependent on a supply chain
but we can actually get back to doing
what we need to do with materials on
hand okay looks like we got three more
questions yeah needs water
for more questions the last of which is
thank you immensely for your work chat
needs moderators let's just run through
them quickly and then we'll sign off and
maybe we'll be back again next Tuesday
if not definitely on Friday first of the
last three unless something comes in as
we're answering these quakes quickly
what's your affiliation with Princeton
all about short version we are this year
both visiting fellows at the James
Madison program at Princeton University
due to the extraordinary generosity of
the professor st. known as Robby George
who encouraged us to apply after Brett
and Robby met each other
Brett and professor George met each
other when they testified before
Congress in spring of 2018 I think we
were then invited may 16th of 2018
you would never know that sort of sign
oh but how do you know that it was the
two years to the day it was one day
before two years to the day the
anniversary of the protests at Evergreen
they erupted in my classroom that's all
I know well that wouldn't be right then
because that was May 23rd 2017 2017 so
it would have been 2019 okay but you
said May 16th all right
I'm confused we are not going to gain
the chat over it unfortunately that is
one of the things that I do keep track
of yep not very interesting um so we
then we're invited to speak at for
instance commencement that's that fall
and Robbie then encouraged us to apply
for these positions which has been
wonderful although we are visiting well
but not in residence we are here in
Portland Oregon is that can you go up so
I can see if we just answered that one
good okay so we don't we have for three
more quickly how come the other
coronaviruses disappeared they didn't
they're still out there
they they're still out there stars 100
you're talking about stars one and Murs
actually MERS is still out there and it
it erupts it seems to require contact
with an infected camel in Saudi Arabia
and so it's somewhat rare that it
travels outside of Saudi Arabia I guess
SARS one is interesting why was it so
intense much more localized than sighs
to which we're living through now and
what was it it lasted 16 18 months ish
and then it seems to have gone
underground I don't want to claim that
it's disappeared I don't know I don't
have an answer to this disappear I mean
I think the answer is likely to be a
mismatch between the available channels
for transmission and the modality of the
virus so you know I keep saying this
thing which is that the creatures are
all trying to get into the future it
doesn't mean that they have a channel
that's viable to do so and so you know
let's take a bola for example Ebola is
highly effective at being transmitted
under some circumstances but it is so
overwhelming to the people who have
contracted it that it burns out quickly
and doesn't leap to the next village so
I don't know this particular answer but
the general answer is going to be
because it wasn't structured to persist
and so some combination of
immunity awareness and other measures
and just the simple way that we function
caused it not to be well adapted and it
went extinct the way other creatures go
extinct yeah okay two more heard a New
York nurse say yesterday that they are
surprised to see car crash victims with
lung damage that looks damaged from
covin thoughts it's when students when
we were teaching in the classroom and
students would ask questions like this I
would either not engage until I'd seen
the evidence that this was actually a
real observation or begin with a very
strong caveat that any answer is
assuming that this is actually true and
so I'm also not even you could interpret
that question in two ways
yeah are they seeing damage from Cova
din car crash victims in other words
there are more victims than we know and
they're seeing it because their look
they're looking at x-rays of these
peoples lungs or does it mean that
damage from Kove it looks like car crash
damage anyway hard to answer without
knowing which of these were even looking
at okay so so they're still growing
we're gonna only answer three more and
then we're done we're done okay guys can
we close the transmission of a virus by
lockdowns as some will never follow with
the common cold go away if everyone
isolated for three times the infection
period that's two questions
lockdowns are not going to stop
transmission because transmission will
still happen within hospitals as new
cases come in and within households but
it will slow radically and that's what
it's not disappearing the curve it's
flattening the curve so you write that
even even with perfect perfect following
you know perfect adherence to lock downs
you wouldn't you wouldn't disappear
transmissions entirely I wasn't gonna go
to the next one yeah what is the main
obstacle to miniaturize virus tests and
do them via the smartphone energy optics
the technology my phone isn't nearly as
smart as it thinks it is and I just
don't think it's up to the challenge
doing this sort of test I'm not sure how
a smartphone would even be involved I
just want to test that works I don't
need it to be an app yeah there's some
there's some things that your phone
presumably can't do it cannot take in
fluids you know I can't do swabs and
taking blood and such okay last one
hi guys could social distancing result
in common colds and other short-lived
pathogens going extinct in the nations
that are practicing it extinct is tough
because the thing is zero is an
absorbing boundary that's the idea so if
you imagine a population of anything
right a population can fluctuate wildly
it can get very low you know the
population of sea otters in the Pacific
was down to 80 individuals I think
something similar happened to elephant
seals and then they've come back up but
if you imagine 80 is very low but if you
hit zero something new happens once you
hit zero
there's no bounce and so in order to get
these things to go extinct you have to
hit zero and it's not inconceivable that
some sort of measure could cause that to
happen I think we did it with smallpox
right seems to be although the question
you know I remember I think it was
during the Clinton administration there
was a question about whether to destroy
the last samples of smallpox because we
thought we had successfully banished it
and those samples of course run the risk
of escaping into the world but I thought
the decision was right assuming I
remember what the decision was Troy them
but there could all we could always be
hiding somewhere that you don't know
about and so you think it's at zero when
really it's just at an undetectably low
level so anyway
extinction is tough but increasingly we
should be thinking about this because
what we are doing at the moment is we
are inviting new pathogens in and just
adding them to the calendar and you know
what would a normal human life look like
with respect to colds in comparison to
this one where people are flying around
and transporting every cold everywhere
all right thank you guys
all right thanks and thanks Sam
appreciate the counter fiber there
all right this has been exhausting but
fun and we will pick this up in our next
livestream in the next couple of days so
stay tuned
alright thanks everyone
[Music]