welcome to meditating with John Rebecca
I'm a cognitive psychologist and a
cognitive scientist at the University of
Toronto by scientifically an
academically study phenomena like
mindfulness and related phenomena like
insight flow mystical experience
transformative experience higher states
of consciousness the cultivation of
wisdom I've also been practicing the
pasta meditation Metta contemplation in
touch each one in cheek on for over 29
years and teaching them professionally
for close to 20 years this is a course
welcome you're welcome to stay with us
but if you joined us for the first time
you can check the notes in the
description for this video and you will
find links to previous sessions and
they're broken up into two playlists
there are T are lessons that way you can
go and see the principles I've taught
and then just says because this course
is broken up in the following manner
every Monday is a Dharma day I will
teach an important principle a new skill
will do usually an exercise to practice
it and get a direct experiment and then
we'll sit together and then they'll be
Q&A and then Tuesday for through Friday
we meet I'll do a bit of review we sit
together and then there's Q&A usually a
little bit longer at the end of those
and that's every weekday at 9:30 est for
the Q&A please limit your questions to
questions about the practice meditation
contemplation etc for more general
questions on you're welcome to join me
today it'll be posted on Twitter or
Facebook and LinkedIn also notification
on my channel that we're going to have a
live stream Q&A for more general
questions broader questions and that's
at 3 p.m. est today all right so I think
there's those are all the announcements
we need right now please get yourself
into your posture set your phones on do
not disturb
and we'll again when I say the word
begin begin
you
you
[Music]
slowly come out of your practice trying
as best you can to integrate what you
cultivated in your practice with your
everyday consciousness and cognition
coming out of your set is part of the
practice all right so let's take a look
at some questions that people might have
a question from the mad truth is it
necessary to count during find your
focus often find that doing so pulls my
attention for my breath to the words
I'm counting not know if you can just
sort of note
some people say letters or some people
just sort of find a rhythm but if you
have some way of noting when you've had
a continuity of mindfulness that's
that's fine so as long as you've got
something that says oh remember sati to
remember to remind oh that's what it was
like to be you know momentum of
mindfulness Jason you refresh the swing
you scream please it's a super-large so
we're just having a minor technical
difficulty okay it's done thank you
mark Takai of it okay this is from
Raynard living I seem to be a focus my
breath but still notice one or two
thoughts passing through my mind at the
same time that this means are not
focusing correctly probably not that's
probably what I mean when I say but you
know you have your your your your breath
following your breath is center stage
and it's taking up the majority of your
awareness and then sort of more back
rounded peripheral and more fleeting is
your monkeymod
but if you can honestly say oh no I kept
the center and the majority center
staged on my breath then you're then you
are definitely focusing it's only when
you feel that sort of might let the
majority of my mind gave priority to
well my monkey mind was doing that
you've actually been distracted
Andre yeah that's good to see you Andre
well doing baby breaths trying to
breathe using abdomen rather the chest
I let the body breath this way on its
own but I feel like I'm stretching and
retracting the belly without much air
flowing in or out at the at the ends the
end of intake and exhale am i over using
the muscles or doing something
incorrectly do you have any advice you
might be pushing it towards the end and
you or you there's that's possibility
and then you might be being too directed
you know to directive I should say of
your breathing but it also might be that
you're getting you're tracking your
breathing very well because there is
actually some meditation traditions
actually break up following the breath
into you feel the expansion there's a
pause there's that gap and then you feel
the contraction there's a pause you feel
that gap this tradition doesn't do that
but you might be noticing that gap you
might be associate it's particularly you
could use with it some pranayama
traditions especially but you might be
noticing that gap if you feel like
you're over stretched if you feel like
you're just doing it naturally it might
be that what's happening is you're
actually noticing that extension and
that brief pause so if you feel like
you're pushing it then of course trying
to let it go even more to people as
natural as possible but if you can
honestly say no I'm not pushing it is
just hopping naturally you might be
noticing that pause and actually feeling
that period when your abdomen is
extended or contracted and that might be
making it more salient for you and if
that's the case instead of thinking of
it as a negative thing oh no think of it
as a positive things
oh no I'm tracking my breath so well I'm
actually picking up on that pause and
I'm just getting that sense of expansion
and there's a sense of contraction I
hear a Kroger when I'm noticing noticing
being things I started to notice a lot
of what I started to call storytelling
usually about my past that seems
significant but not sure why any
thoughts that is because what's
happening is you are trading what's
called your default mode network
so there your brain is basically
oriented two ways it's task oriented and
there's a couple networks
and this is when your attention is out
and directed on the task like when
you're following your breath but
typically when we disengage from the
world and close our eyes especially we
close our eyes but even we're just
disengaging we get mind-wandering
that's another network that's called the
default mode Network and it's adaptive
it has very important functions that's
why we spend so much time in it and what
and that default mode network is
basically very self referential it's
about your we tell stories we do mental
time travel so you're telling months of
stories about the past this is very
normal
some people Robin Hart Harris and other
cognitive scientists think the default
mode Network is where we're both where
we're building a lot of what in a lot of
these traditions is called the ego this
sort of self referential
autobiographical thing thing that we
identify with and that is sort of
constraining and modifying all of our
other cognition and part of what might
be going on is in meditation
we're triggering that but we're also
triggering the task focus Network and
we're bringing them together so that we
can get a new configuration we can get
something beyond because normally when
one shuts on when one turns on the other
shuts off they go like this right and
we're trying to do this and so it's very
normal for the all of this time travel
and storytelling to come up but you keep
breaking up it's automaticity you get
more and more the capacity that these
might actually interweave with each
other and that brings about a profound
kind of insight and change it it has the
capacity to radically transform your
sense of self and your sense of being in
the world
Austin Collins during matters should I
be having a discussion with myself about
the categories that I'm assigning and
assuming he's a friend whether role does
he know what else could he be yes
so Austin this is part of a general
thing that I tell people because it is
kind of confusing because well I'm not
supposed to be you know talking in my
mind the one thing that's excluded from
that and this was like the raft in the
Buddhist tradition the Buddha told the
story about a man who built a raft to
get across
River and once he's on across the river
he holds on to the raft
the raft is useful while you're on the
river it's transitional but once you get
to that place you don't need the raft
anymore you have to put it away but it's
also wrong to say well I don't need a
raft to try to walk through the river
right from the beginning so at the
beginning you have to coach yourself you
have to talk yourself this is how we
learn a lot of skills we talk to ourself
and we coach ourselves if your inner
speech is coaching speech it is fine but
try to and if you watch good coaches at
first they talk a lot and then they
slowly diminish because you don't have
to talk to yourself when you walk into a
room and sit down you don't have to say
okay move this leg move that leg look
around sit down you've built up the
skill and then you can do what you do is
you right use the skill so coaching
yourself inner speech for coaching is
completely legitimate it's a raft but
don't get attached to it expect it
gradually very gradually to diminish
until you can just do those things
without having to talk to yourself just
like you can look around the room to see
what's different without having to talk
to yourself deniz mentis not sure if I'm
doing medically I reviewed the lesson
but after each mantra it's somewhat
difficult to identify specific thoughts
related to my roller model should I
pause longer
yes pause a bit longer but perhaps and
also don't think that the only thing you
should be finding are thoughts you
should be finding feelings you should be
finding places where your attention goes
in your body or where your attention
wants to go in your memory or in the
world those are also ways in which you
get answers to your questions so pause
longer and broaden your scope of what
counts as a response to your question so
everyone thank you very much for joining
I want to think about your friend a
techno may Jamar
my beloved son Jason please subscribe to
the channel to be notified of the next
video to be notified at the qat also
there you will find videos on
mindfulness on insight higher states of
consciousness
mr. experienced the cultivation of
wisdom responding to the meeting crisis
in general in society and
[Music]
and things that would help you to
incorporate this practice into your life
much more comprehensively and
transformative Lee I'm doing this to
really try and help people and so I
invite you to share this with as many
people as you can because that will help
me to help as many people as I can in
these difficult and challenging times
reminder we're doing this every weekday
morning at 9:30 EST mondays are Dharma
days in which I teach Tuesdays through
Friday we sit every day has a Q&A at the
end links to previous lessons and sits
can be found in the notes and a reminder
that later today at 3 p.m. we'll have
the general Q&A being live-streamed
thank you very much for your time and
attention everyone keep practicing