great hyperbole thanks for making time
for this conversation um I've been I can
say show how college has changed my life
deeply really I was already on a
trajectory but there the 18 months I
spent there between September 2001 and I
think March 2003 and we're really
transformative in many ways for me in
terms of the network I connected to in
terms of what I learned and they really
influenced everything that I've done
since so I'm really excited to reconnect
with the college and and and hear how
our things have gone in with these
transformations that were all now living
but maybe we'll start off by because
you've relatively new to imparting
learning into enter college maybe we'll
start off by you telling a little bit
how you got to the college and and what
you found there but if you could briefly
I just noticed you don't matter setting
where um it blurs the background I don't
know am I really okay I didn't realize I
was hold on as you're moving you go
blurry well let's see what I've got here
I think that I was turned off my virtual
backgrounds you know what setting that
sorry and no I'm also a bit of a Luddite
with these things well it's then it's
okay if you move forward and backward
you shorty go fuzzy but that it doesn't
matter that's that's just I've been okay
now you got now you've got me worried
about this hold on what about this let's
spread up yeah hopefully you can edit
all that out unfortunately because of
the the financial situation and time I
just trust that rose rose video all in
there great so we've got content
excellent well thank you Daniel so much
for reaching out and for inviting me to
for a conversation I'm really grateful
to you know talk with as many members of
the extended Schumacher family as I can
and you know you know you talked about
your connections or and network and sort
of deep affinity for the college and its
influence and it's it's a story that I
hear all the time which is are really
really fantastic
you know whomever I have a conversation
with whether they've been on a weekend
short course you have been there for a
you know summer horticultural residency
or master's program it seems one thing
that most people have in common is a
deep connection that spans in your case
you know decades and you know for many
people as a similar amount of time and
it's it's been wonderful to be there you
know as you said I'm relatively new to
being in October and to have
conversations with students again who
are there for a short time or for the
entire year and see that transformation
happen and that's honestly one of the
reasons that I was drawn to Schumacher
in the first place I had been at at a
small college in Vermont in the u.s.
called Sterling College which is you
know a pretty small but a hundred
students all undergraduate focused on
ecological thinking and you know
community orientation and that sort of
thing with a farm that supports the
college and all of the students
participate in community work so you
know the the connections between that
pedagogy and Schumacher's are
really profound but what I found at the
end of 15 years at Sterling was that I
was looking for a place to that that
engaged perhaps more on a global scale
and you know worked with graduate
students and worked with you know a
greater number of students you know the
students that come in on short courses
for example have been the last couple of
years you know five or six hundred
students per year and if if I have the
opportunity to support a college that
has a greater impact that way and that's
really what I was looking for in the
next chapter of my own academic
leadership and hopefully teaching you
know that's on the horizon for me as
well at Schumacher so you know it's been
a really in well it's been a challenging
transition we talked before the the
conversation here a little bit about you
know anybody coming into a new position
this particular year you know with the
with the covent you know pandemic and
the crisis and stuff the associated
financial challenges and you know impact
on higher education generally it's a
particularly challenging time and I'm
happy it's to talk about how Schumacher
is approaching some of those in really I
think interesting and potentially
innovative ways but initially the
transition was fairly comfortable you
know coming from a place from a higher
ed institution that's based on community
where everybody sits in a circle and
then talks together on a regular basis
and eats together you know those are I
think some of the essential facets
essential tenants really of you know
what I think is a deep holistic learning
experience and you know I talk often
about you know community learning as
being the basis of what Schumacher does
so it has been for a long time and so
I'm really focusing a lot of energy on
you know making sure that that stays as
intact as possible even when students
aren't able to be there in person and
for me this this whole notion egg in the
Eco village movement we call them for a
while living in learning centers and of
veggie where the setting and the
community and
the rhythms of the community a part of
the pedagogy it's it's not what you
learn in classroom only it's it's almost
by osmosis you learn so many other
skills and so many other more mindful
ways of living in community and
absolutely made the I think the well for
me since I'm not in the classroom you
know or out on field courses or anything
like that you know my main interaction
with students is at mealtimes and you
know I think those are actually even for
students and faculty and staff some of
the most valuable conversations because
those happen you know I think Satish
would say you know some of the most
meaningful conversations happen when
you're washing up the dishes or when
you're emptying the compost and you know
that's when the true learning happens
and I think you know one thing that
Schumacher has that a lot of other
universities do not is this sort of
spaciousness really for having that it's
the time for reflection and for making
unique and innovative connections that
you might not ordinarily make you know
intergenerational ones when we have you
know students on an L during short
course for example you know have really
deep conversations with students who are
in a collage achill Design Thinking
masters program and you know I think
there are networks create and
relationships created in those
conversations that persist well beyond
students experience at the college yeah
I mean I remember I know that the the
rhythms have been slightly they're
slightly less packed than they were when
when I was there almost 20 years ago
during the masters in holistic science
because at that time the Masters was
only four years old and there was still
quite a lot of this relationship
building with with Plymouth and making
sure that we proved that we were an
academic course that deserve the Masters
of in science and and so in my whole
heart we were still heavily over
examined we had many more essays than
they have now but I I felt it because
there's all these parallel streams and I
mean in those days there was only one
masters but there were more short
courses and it just created this
opportunity to learn that I
as a bit of an omnivore in terms of the
intellectual disciplines I just it's
almost like I felt a intellectual
glutton for slightly overwhelming and it
took a while to decelerate from that but
I think it is a wonderful there's just
always something on that is another
learning opportunity like just if you
look at the blackboard or the whiteboard
and in the entrance hall and then some
somebody from another course is offering
a short to talk or walk on that more or
all these other activities that that
just make it a really rich environment
absolutely I mean you know like you said
it's the the living and learning
together that's or create the fabric
that I think is exactly what students
are looking for when they choose a place
like Schumacher to do their masters or
you know or soon to do bachelor's
actually you know that's interesting I
didn't know that it's just reflecting on
the one thing that has always been a
dream of a lot of people is making the
actual infrastructure a little bit more
like what they've ador calls architect
the architecture has pedagogy and on the
one hand there was something about there
is something about the old posten and as
a building that that really feels like a
sort of alchemical cauldron where
transformation happens but but all that
the accommodation blocks of course it
would be wonderful to find a
philanthropist who says build the most
amazing ecological retrofits that the
world has ever seen and exactly take
these blocks out of the seventies a
certain charm most people by now loves
the blocks because they have that
seventies charm well what's interesting
about what you say is that you know as
you know the old posture and has not
been accessible for you know that since
before I arrived so well over a year now
because of the you know the challenges
to the roof and we needed to recite the
entire roof nobody had done so for about
four hundred years apparently and we
were able to get financial support to do
that
and you know work on that began shortly
after the first of the year
and then abruptly stopped in March and I
think that I saw some construction
workers there just the other day so I
think we're getting back into it and so
hopefully that construction will be done
now in the very early months of next
year in time for our 30th anniversary
celebration in in May of 2021
interesting that you know everybody had
talked about the old posture and when I
was doing research you know about the
college before arriving here almost all
of the photographs I could see were of
the old posture and then I arrived is
that well actually we can't use that
building for another you know 16 18
months and what has struck me is that
very quickly you know the staff and the
students at the college have recreated
Schumacher in whatever spaces were of it
have been available yeah I noticed that
when I was dead
last time I was there was in October
when I taught a few days on the masters
in ecological design thinking and and I
was sort of dreading going there with
not being able to access the pasta and
when I arrived and saw the fence around
it
but you you're right in terms of the
actual feel and the odd set a craft
center seems to function just as well to
create right so in some ways what that
taught me very quickly and I think a lot
of the you know longer time staff at the
college was that the college isn't
necessarily a building at all and that
the old posturing is a lovely building
but the college is the spirit and the
college is the community the networks
the relationships and the pedagogy and
it I don't think it really matters where
it is but it can if it's held as
strongly as it is and you know the staff
really are as passionate as they are
then I think that learning community can
be in any space and you know I think it
is where it is right now because of
effectively an emergency that required
them to vacate the old Parson very
quickly but you know quite rapidly I
think everybody has settled into you
know other accommodation
offices other teaching and learning
spaces which may change again and what I
was more referring to is like when I I
was also surprised how easily the
process in the sense the feeling the
community can continue even without the
old Posten and its mother um since like
when I was there 20 years ago um there
wasn't as much food grown that like all
the food was local and organic it came
up from River fort and so on but there's
been an evolution to even more practice
what one preaches and part of that
would've oh of course at some point
would always be a dream to generate
their own renewable energy really have
very efficient eco retrofit buildings
and ensure what can be done teaching
that that you don't have to pull down
the old structures you can retrofit them
in a way that makes it much more energy
efficient and more beautiful yes yeah
but how like because you're you also
ahead of Dartington learning I think is
the title yeah and I am so I might I
think I had the longest title at larding
Tanisha's head of Schumacher college and
interim director of learning for
Dartington Hall trust yeah it doesn't
really fit on a nametag or business card
very well but so I took on the role of
director of learning only about around
810 weeks ago as the sort of structure
of the director to Dartington you know
shifted a little bit and it struck me
that no one it was a great opportunity
to be able to connect you know
Schumacher's vision with and pedagogy
and community learning and everything
with other learning initiatives that
were happening at Dartington you know
the art school is the most obvious one
of those we were launching a couple of
master's programs this coming year one
poetics of imagination with Martin Shaw
and Tracy war and another arts in place
which is going to start in January and
you know I think as
we talked about how we were going to do
that well one it naturally increases the
number of students who were going to be
at Dartington as a whole and it was
really important to me that all of those
students have a shared community
learning experience and we don't
segregate students in an art school from
students at Schumacher that they're all
fully integrated have meals together you
know do community work together have
relatively similar experiences and then
also cross fertilize in ways that I
think you know I've talked about already
at mealtimes and so on between arts
programs and say holistic science or
regenerative economics in ways I think
that can be really rich and so because
it's like when 20 years ago the the art
school was running completely separate
from from the college and I make 'shy
that's one thing that I hadn't clocked
so to speak and that the art schools has
come back because I thought that for why
the art school actually moved out of
tottington didn't it it did and so this
is not the same name it's not the
Dartington College of Arts it's the
Darden School of Arts you know but
effectively it is a resurgence a
renaissance of the art schools residents
you know on the estate you know we have
fantastic facilities in the studio
buildings in what's called space what
has been called lower closed you know we
have residential accommodation for you
know at least 180 students at this point
you know across the estate and so as
we're looking you know doing three four
five year plans looking ahead we
actually anticipate between you know a
hundred and twenty onto 150 students at
all times at Dartington across all of
the different learning experiences you
make him really happy this is for awhile
it just it's it's refreshing to see that
kind of vision of bringing the two
together and really working with this
state as a whole again and because this
it's just been a long time this slight
dynamic
between darting who's always been
feeding Schumer hard to do it's
wonderful work in terms of supporting it
and a lot of people don't understand
that they look at the prices of sri maha
college and they think oh that's elitist
that's too expensive but I've been on
both sides of taking courses and helping
to organize them in and from from the
inside out it's too cheap it's it's
impossible to run and and in that
dynamic
I think people didn't understand that to
do the kind of small group intensive
with world-class teachers education even
if the teachers also come and don't
really earn what they were doing
somewhere else
it still is a pretty tight economic game
to make it work and and it actually
needs filling traffic help I mean it's
it's for me it's an example of that
we're really mistaken as a society
culture and civilization if we think
that education needs to wash its own
face as a business mmm education should
be our investment into the future of
humanity into the future of the
workforce that will provide first from
well it just shouldn't have to be a
business because the minute becomes a
business it also teaches differently in
a different way and and I don't think
that's what was culture well at the same
time you know it it is a business
unfortunately you know higher education
is a very unique and challenging
business to be in and I think part of
the part of our approach to that
challenge right now is you know with as
with a lot of higher ed institutions is
to diversify the learning offering
portfolio and to be able to you know for
me and to be able to engage more
learners with exactly the kinds of
things that we've been talking about
terms richness the transformational
learning experiences the access and
networks access to leading thinkers in
the field and you know with this sort of
reconnection or you know further
engagement with with Dartington as a
whole we have the opportunity to
increase our short courses for
example Schumacher short courses that
have been really successful over the
last several years can now engage you
know learners in areas such as craft and
visual art and performance and music and
you know mind body ecology connections
and wellness and really across the
curriculum and I think that the market
is obviously there oh and and the
horticulture and food and farming which
is something we're already doing and you
know we can talk about that as well so I
would like to talk a little bit about
the courses that we're offering now and
coming up and you know again in these
you know it's being it's become cliche
to say these are unprecedented times but
you know they are and what else are you
going to say you know I think we have
very quickly been able to put together a
you know fairly modest portfolio of
things that are accessible to people who
are not able to come because we can't
have them in residence for example you
know you'll you're familiar I'm sure
with the joy of six earth talk series
that we've been running I think this is
week four of that first series and we're
planning to continue that series now
those have been much more successful
than we had anticipated they would be
with about three to four hundred people
attending each one and you know staying
through the whole thing and so that's
been really great really positive
feedback and and great conversation in
the chats and so on while we're on that
point is a completely different project
and I'm sure you've got enough on to
fundraise for it yeah M William for all
those years the first twenty years of
the college of fifteen years until
William left as a house housekeeper and
did all the recording of all the
Wednesday evening talks on I still have
about twenty five VHS tapes I don't have
Hui to play anymore and and I I'm
wondering whether there is actually is
it a specific fundraising package then
relatively quickly prepare to say in the
spirit
of Creative Commons and and opening
comments we we will make available this
open our 28 year yeah you know 28 year
record what some of the people have
passed away since I mean this is amazing
um speakers that there are in in that
and with just a little bit of
post-production like where you kind of
put a modern intro and I'm not an outro
Sumatra and darting and and you you you
create a website where people can stream
and then donate and then you you have
somebody else upload one of them every
couple of days to YouTube and you build
your own through through putting this
there's a vast amount of resource I'll
build your own YouTube channel I think I
think it's it's a it's a nice project
that in comparison for the the reach the
benefit to people that like the the
seeding of valuable information and
spreading it and the benefit in terms of
advertising that it would get for the
college I think it's it's worth doing I
think you're right absolutely I mean we
have a modest archive already of ones
that have been digitized or that were
recorded digitally to begin with and you
know some work needs to be done on that
to package it nicely it's kind of
sitting on YouTube and various other
places but I think you're right that
this is it would be a great project to
jump into yeah but we wanted to get to
because I'm you know I'm teaching on the
MA in ecological design thinking have
done for the last three or four years
yeah she helped when when we first build
up the the course I am to the then
director I suggested that Seton Baxter
would be the right person to help launch
that course he's like sometimes even
within the college there is a lack of um
transmission of the historic connections
at the time nobody knew you were who see
him Baxter was who was when I was there
he was a really important part of the
college and and then for a while he was
external examiner and I very much
enjoyed my conversations were seeking
he's been there gentlemen yeah so yeah
let's get into the the masters courses
because they all look or we do that
Daniel just one other thing that we're
currently doing and I just wanted to
highlight those things I think they're
they're important and actually this
one's quite innovative is over the last
couple of years we've had really record
enrollments in the summer horticulture
residency program and in fact we
increased our enrollment this year in
anticipation of having more students
than ever in residence we weren't able
to do that so we launched an online
gardening course which effectively sold
out with a week and it started I think
not quite a fortnight ago and it's been
quite successful from all the feedback
I've heard about about 50 students on
this online gardening course and it is
true to schumacher form experiential and
so students engage in gardening in their
own you know home spaces and then they
come back and talk about the experiences
that they've had and talk with colum
who's our lead grower and then who's
lead on the course and I think it's it's
a great model and very different from a
lot of sort of online gardening courses
that are out there and so that's going
to be running for the next six months
wonderful yeah I mean a lot of people
come back into gardening with lockdown
and everything and another
Shuma her graduate and and close friend
to Shu maja and more and more rec from
crystal waters mmm you know she she's
during lockdown she created this
wonderful series of like every day from
her permaculture garden she would just
spend five minutes explaining little
trick of home gardening in home on
permaculture and it's wonderful to hear
that are you doing that now yeah
absolutely and so yes so starting in the
autumn looking at our postgraduate
courses we are we've been doing all
sorts of scenario planning as everybody
has and there have been you know I read
the times I read supplements on a daily
basis to sort of see what the pulse is
and I'm in conversation with colleagues
around the world about sort of what the
best guesses are as far as you know how
are we going to be able to engage with
students come September so we have a
number of different scenarios but the
one that we are you know currently
working with is that we are not planning
to have students in residence in
September yet we are starting three
master's programs on September 14th so
we are planning to deliver the first
module entirely online again in ways
that try to replicate as Mabon as best
as possible the experience will
regenerative learning process of
Schumacher in a distant setting and then
the anticipation is that when the second
module comes around in November we'll be
able to have at least UK students in
residence at the college and we're
making provisions so that international
students who may not have the
opportunity to travel or may have visa
issues can attend virtually for that
second half of the first term and in
January the anticipation in in our
current model is that we'll be able to
have most if not all students and
residents again so we are launching
three courses you know two at Schumacher
and one at the art school so I'm talking
I always talk about all of them together
so ecological design thinking and
regenerative economics regenerative
economics used to be economics for
transition and we've made that
transition to regenerative I think it's
a more appropriate term in evolution of
the course and and then poetics of
imagination at the art school and all
three of those are being taught they
were going to be taught originally has
low residency programs and so as we get
through these sort of you know creative
first couple of modules they will get
into a rhythm of low residency and you
know we did that for two reasons one -
well the principal reason it really is
to make the courses as accessible as
possible to as broad a range of students
as possible and the second is to
increase the number of students from the
UK who are able to or you know enticed
in attention market courses you know as
I'm sure you're aware we've had a for
the preponderance of students the vast
majority
you know we're entering to have been
international students over the last
several years so when I first arrived
and this predates my arrival actually as
we've dropped our tuition fees
considerably some 45% for UK students
and 30% for international students and
we've already seen in our applicants and
our inquiries this year a much greater
proportion of UK students interested in
the courses and I think that's both
because of the tuition drop and because
of you know they can come for two weeks
and then go back to their homes or you
know businesses or other lives for four
weeks and engage in meaningful
experience related to their studies and
then bring that experience back for when
they come for the following two weeks
learning cycle exactly exactly and all
of them is inter woven come January with
the other three courses that we're
launching and so holistic science will
start in January and we took a hiatus
from that this year but we're launching
it again and let's hear that because
there was for a while there was this
kind of alarming conversation that they
might just not run it again and so I I'm
very excited I think it would have been
a huge mistake to rhythm with that
exactly well well we have adapted in
some sense or brought it into the more
into the 21st century you know by adding
a couple of modules that engage with
more contemporary philosophy and
engagement with issues like post
humanism and sort of really creative
thinking about the human and more than
human you know connections that can be
made through looking at there's various
scientific discourse and we're running
that in parallel actually with a new
program that any lecture is lead on
called engaged ecology which really is I
think I helped Andy a bit with the
development of that program and it I
think it really sort of flips even more
than that the traditional Schumacher
program it flips sort of the embodied
experience with the academic one even
more on its head I mean really four
grounds the idea of making at the very
beginning and engage
students in you know in the process of
whether it's you know depending on the
season if we run the course when we run
the course again whether it's growing
their own flax and and weaving a garment
out of that and using that as an entry
into talking about textiles and talking
about agriculture and agri-food tree and
anycall ecological systems or if it's
carving a spoon and a bowl
you know those very first week of the
course you know to engage them in that
sort of really tactile process of making
that engages them again with
conversations about tradition
conversations about the human and more
than human connection and blurring those
boundaries so I learn bookbinding in my
doing the Masters and holistic science
Mary Philip and the Craft Center doing
her book binding workshops yeah yeah
yeah books I made back then so I'm
excited to run those two programs side
by side starting in January I think
there's going to be a lot of really
interesting interweaving and
collaboration possible there and those
are but two fully residential courses
that we're running mystic science will
continue to be fully residential yeah
this time around Italy yep yep and so
we're running that straight through till
the end of June which is a slightly
different timescale and I think for the
first time we'll have those students
overlapping with a horticulture
residency program in in a longer way
than they have in the past because
typically there's been a couple days or
a week or so of overlap in April but
here the students will be here straight
through until summer which will be I
think it really differrent perience and
then they leave and then they do them
the thesis and then of course actually
finishes in general kind of August or
something like that yeah also it's a
convinced master's it's not a full year
master's thing oh so now I would need to
look up the dates to be really specific
so yeah check the website and and I mean
it so what I'm hearing is that to some
extent
the kovat situation only amplified
something that was already going on
which is where we need to be less
residential and more blended learning
and and and make it more accessible
right absolutely
you know I look at a lot of through
higher ed responses to Kovan and a lot
of them say well we need to decrease our
reliance on international students
because we're not going to have as many
international students particularly in
the UK in the u.s. that's been a
significant issue and that's something
that we addressed
not that we could fort you know foresee
the future but something we've began to
address already a year ago and so I
think we are well positioned and so far
the recruitment has been going you know
as well as we can it be as well as can
be expected and we're looking forward to
starting these courses as I've laid out
so I think things are looking really
good one thing that they're just
suddenly felt compelled to do to give
you a bit of history that you might have
not heard of em is at some point must
have been like after after left so Maha
um a few years later and moved to
Finland and lived at eco village in in
Scotland and ran Finn home college at
the time and together with a co-director
Mary Hollander and my my job was really
the designing new masters courses and
new new collaborations and one of the
projects we were in conversation with
Schumacher at the time and Brian Goodwin
was the lead on on that conversation was
to create and I still think that would
be a one a wonderful master's course to
offer in the UK I
my personal learning I always say that
there were three places that really
shaped the
cases of my work in in the time between
1999 and 2003 and it wasn't it was
basically my time at Yamaha initially
but before that I was at the Center for
alternative technology for a while doing
short courses um and then afterwards the
fintan experience and I felt that each
one of them while there they all have a
certain overlap they have kind of
slightly different centers of gravity
and strengths in terms of what what they
teach and in school in those like in
2008 2009 there was this conversation of
working with San Andres as the
certifying University and then have a
course weather where the students would
spend instead of induction at San Andres
in they would have three residential
modules one at Omaha one a cap and one a
fin horn mmm I still think that that
would I mean it's a it's a lot of
bringing a lot of different
organizations yeah one hat but but it
would be a powerful course - it would be
and I think that's one of the lessons
that people are learning from our
current situation as well that you know
a lot of networking and collaboration is
almost going to be necessary to move
forward and to create learning
experiences for you know I think post
graduate largely but also I think
undergraduate students if possible at a
lot of these international
collaborations and international
university partnerships are becoming
more and more popular to talk about you
know as being alternatives and being
potential ways to if not preserve higher
education I don't think that's what
anybody is looking to do but - I think
evolved higher education in directions I
think that it needs to go
you know given our current situation and
a lot of that just makes sense you know
one thing that I think Shuma has already
played a bit of a role in is this M we
to my mind we need to really reinvent
education from the ground up as as a
lifelong journey rather
as something that you do in the first
third of your life and then you make
some money with it and then you retired
and because of the offer that you maha
has traditionally you've always had a
blend of young students and very mature
students who might even like some of
them after retirement some of them in a
change of career dropping out of the rat
race and wanting to refocus and and I
think that's we need to create
international partnerships or
organizations that provide different
types of vocational and not formal and
informal learning programs and somehow
bring them together into a collaborative
not one major organization but a network
of organizations that would enable I to
basically the greater turn back
generation when they the world is
changing so fast that to do a
traditional degree is a waste of money
and time to some extent and I've always
been dreaming of this idea that all
these leaders in alternative educational
ecological holistic awareness education
would come together with all the
grassroots institutions of like the
global permaculture training webs like
networks and the agroforestry people and
now ecosystems restoration camps as
sites where you could do practical
learning and create this the system
where students can build their own
four-year journey and Edward Miller from
from the University of international
cooperation in Costa Rica gave me this
other piece in this puzzle because he
was thinking of something very similar
and he said yeah I I agree with you and
I had this idea that people would have a
passport
that basically the students would build
their own program take these different
courses some of them would be online so
you could maybe do a guy education
design for sustainability cause while
you were in an ecosystems restoration
camp because they they were together and
um and then each organization stamps
X units and all you'd have to do is
validate the the different units against
each other so after in in the in the
complexity after four years then
everybody together certifies and that
would my mind it would create graduates
that might have done a man violent
communication in the socio cracy
training and then in agra forestry
training and then spend some time at shu
maha doing a masters or a couple of
residential courses and i think you they
would be so much more employable and so
much more multi skilled and full human
development than a normal academic
courses well i think you're right and
those are exactly some of the
conversations that we're having you know
it speaks to the experience that I've
had back in the states of working on
bioregional higher education networks
you know in the northeast for example
looking at now I think there were some
28 or 30 universities in the
northeastern us in what we called the
northern forest region but as contiguous
boreal forest trends transition zone and
you know it worked well to think about
that as a unified by region because of
its sort of cultural economic you know
ecological you know interconnections and
I think exactly what you're describing
could happen anywhere in the world you
know and I quite like the bio regional
model because it emphasizes all of the
interconnections that I think Schumacher
you know sees as being essential between
human and not human and more than human
communities and so on and I think the
impediments to something like that you
know are obviously vast you know
particularly as we're talking about
international partnerships and
cooperation and validation and so on
but I think that it's really essential
as we move forward in you know even the
next couple of years I mean certainly
over the five and 10-year horizon that
higher education absolutely has
tremendous challenges about the you know
regarding access regarding sort of
equity regarding for shared experience
of students and you know whether or not
we're providing for you know you can't
really talk about higher education
universally but whether higher education
is providing students with the
experiences that they actually need or
that are useful for them or are in fact
what they're looking for so I think
there needs to be all sorts of flexible
opportunities that could be
intergenerational one is really
essential I think Schumacher does that
quite well I think we could potentially
integrate even more of that into sort of
living and learning communities that
might be intergenerational I think
they're incredible opportunities and now
is really the time to begin having those
conversations and it's I think that
because so many institutions like
Schumacher for example is now at an a
they're now at an age where they've
created their own track record it's not
like in the beginning it was this
experimental innovative educational
institute that really had to kind of
look up to a certifying university and
almost beg them to get on to focus and
now I think it's the other way around
almost you the world's moved on to the
point that more and more people and more
employers also very clearly say
university degrees many people have the
mouth they don't speak to us I want to
see something slightly different here
and so I think the big opportunity is is
that higher education also has a long
track record now and Gaia University and
all these the network are connected to
the e-commerce ities network that is
build our only informally and they
there's a lot of players that were
considered very unconventional and maybe
by some universities not proper
universities and and I I feel now the
first mover advantage will be to not
even try to get certified by these
national systems to just have the
confidence to say we together as a body
of organizations that have together not
track-record say this is a great
educational program that this person has
gone through and and and we can vouch
for the quality of their abilities and
all right exactly you know it's the same
as for creating a certificate program
effectively and saying that you've
completed this course at Schumacher and
to a lot of people that that means a lot
it doesn't necessarily have to be an
official degree and you know that's one
of the reasons that we have increased
the number of short courses that we're
offering because that seems like a
tangible way and a fairly accessible way
for a lot of students to be able to
experience the type of learning that we
offer in different areas and it's very
easy and relatively low-risk for us to
offer we don't need to partner with
another organization and we can create
really accessible content for people
just very briefly I wanted to come back
to the bioregion thing because that's
like what I've noticed in my work I
spend a lot of time focused on community
scales how do you build sustainable
communities I've written most of the
curriculum for guy education and design
for sustainability course which was
really initially the online version of
the eco village design education program
focused on building sustainable
communities but and then also lots of
work with what the different transition
turns up at forests and and I I realized
that my community is centrally important
the to really create a regenerative
system that that includes the diversity
of human expression and and also needs
you really have to do the whole system's
design at the bioregional scale the
scale is just too small and and what's
happened in the year from the US and yes
that there are pockets the Vermont area
being one and sort of Arkansas area
another in over yeah Cascadia and the
west coast our pockets are strong by a
regional initiatives did some of them go
back by now 50 years but in the last
five or ten years I feel lots of
organizations are converging on
understanding that this transformation
of the human presence on earth that we
now have to do in the next three decades
in order to respond to the biophysical
reality of living on planet earth and
needs a
Riaan habitation at the bioregional
scale it needs matching human patterns
back to the biophysical landscape and
mean with isabella kala is wonderful by
regional Learning Centre you've got a
great partner near in Devon and but I
have I moved to Majorca ten years ago
because Islands to me a great case
studies for by a Regional Education and
and I at some other point we should have
a conversation about this how to empower
this learning journey of people in place
to go on a journey of understanding
thereby origin doing the research
multidisciplinary of mapping almost in a
sort of godís Ian and Ian McHarg type
way and what they're working with and
understanding both the the challenges
and opportunities in their region I
don't know if he'd had time to read my
book but my my work is very focused on
questions rather than solutions and
answers and I think there's a huge
opportunity to develop a bioregional
program that engages people in mapping
the bio region and then in their bio
region and then the next year people
from the same bioregion take the map
that the previous cohort develop and
improve upon it and every year you build
a more and more of a cohort in a region
of people who've done part of that
mapping together and that would be a
transformational process in and of
itself enabling this is so necessary
Rhian habitation project process of us
becoming
Rhian digitized again to to the places
and we we draw sustenance from and it
seems like you're proposing to teach a
new course here and well I know the fine
finances of how when you get paid to
develop a course like that but but it's
it's more I would love to have a
conversation on what kind of team could
co-create that course that'll be
pristine but anyway before we end
because I know you've got a go soon and
the in terms of people engaging with the
master's programs how much longer are
they are the enrollments Oh
for those our first deadline is June 1st
and you know we're going to keep
enrollment open after that but you know
I think for priority you know decisions
you know people want to get their
applications in by the 1st of June and
that also if there are any applications
for bursary requests that's also the
same deadline so certainly we'll keep
you know accepting applications after
that point but yeah so coming up pretty
soon
Wow ok and they're feeling well so
they're feeling they're feeling
reasonably well yeah so I would
encourage anybody who is reading or
listening or watching this to you know
get their applications in and you know
there's a different application deadline
of course for the January start courses
so holistic science engaged ecology and
arts in place that's going to be who I'm
guessing but later in the year September
or October would be the deadline for
this yeah and um the in terms of the
this is wonderful like I'm excited to
hear this news of the out school and the
new programs and the graduate programs
and bringing the whole estate more
together and I mean this long journey of
starting estate selling of assets around
outside of the estate and shrinking down
to the coif state over the last well
since it started and the last 40 years
really yeah how are they doing is there
is there a need for any and well-meaning
philanthropists listening to this I I
sense that there's there's still quite a
economic need to finance this well I
think there always is and I know as you
described yourself you know higher
education specifically itself isn't you
know isn't necessarily a massive revenue
generating Enterprise so you know we're
devoting
Dartington is a mission-driven
organization as is Schumacher and you
know Dartington has recently
reinvented itself as a center for
learning and so if everything at the
estate is in support of the type of
learning that happens at Schumacher then
I think we're going to see fantastic
things in the coming years in terms
you know lots of opportunities to use
the resources of the estates for
Schumacher courses and for the art
school courses and short courses and so
on all of the buildings all the spaces a
lot of greater engagement with the land
we are launching a master's in a
regenerative food farming and enterprise
next autumn as well as a BSC and
sustainable food and farming so really
actively engaging with that as we
increase the number of students we're
looking to increase the production of
the farm so right now we produce about
50 percent of all the veg we consume at
the college and you know my hope is to
keep it at that 50 percent level as we
continue to move forward and that's a
significant investment as well so I
think there's a refocusing that's
happening at starting to to really
emphasize these these core purposes of
you know really focusing on social
justice on community on ecology on arts
all under the rubric of learning and
it's a really exciting time to be
thinking about well let's look at this
estate and how we can use all of these
resources to help support of what's
going on so and what I mean it is
amazing I mean just to drop a couple of
ideas here one one thought would be
partnerships with ecosystems restoration
comes in in the Netherlands because
they've increasingly experimenting with
these pop-up ecosystem restoration comes
and Dartington could just like if you
wanted to develop one particular field
into a different type of production you
could actually use a four week or six
week ecosystems restoration camp
partnership with with the foundation
because I'm on the Advisory Council of
the foundation that's why I'm weave
possible collaborations here I think it
could be a really interesting
opportunity to bring I think you're and
build that partnership the other the
other partnership that could be
interesting is with since you know
renamed Jonathan's master's to
regenerative economics and assuming that
you're probably reaching out to John
Fullerton and okay Dre Wirth is already
teaching on it and the whole
regenerative communities network that
was born out of the capital Institute
has a strong by a regional focus and has
very interesting groups in the u.s. one
in Vermont one in the Hudson Valley when
but but also in Costa Rica and in other
places in the world and I think there's
like that by regional program we just
talked about they there could be a
really interesting partnership between
the capital Institute and and the
College on the following developing
something for Devon but something that
could actually possibly be associated
with both of those institutions but
offer on the ground
blended learning in like the
International learning networks that we
were talking about yeah so I apologize
Daniel I really do need to go to my next
next thing but I've got a case for the
thanks thanks so much for the
conversation I very very much appreciate
it well I am deeply grateful to the
college for the influence and had on me
and so um I know sending like
advertising it and getting more people
to come to the College can only help
transform the world positively because I
see what it did to me