howdy this is Jim rut and this is the
Jim rut show
[Music]
this is the gym rut show and I'm your
host Jim rut my guest today is the
thinker writer and doer Bonita Roy I
usually give a brief bio but but need
his life and work are so multifaceted
and always changing I thought it better
to ask her
so Bonita why don't you give us a mini
bio first of all thanks for asking me to
come on your show and thanks for turning
the tables on me so I have to introduce
myself and it can be difficult for me
too I think at the fundamental level I
call myself an insight guide but I also
work toward trying to get novel insight
so that's something I wanted to talk to
you about as we were discussing earlier
that sometimes people are confused about
what I'm trying to do what I'm trying to
say and because I was coming on this
podcast I really spent some time trying
to clarify for myself what it is how do
I fit in this space so I thought we
could talk about it this would be my
first time of talking about myself this
way and kind of throwing it out there
and hopefully that'll be fun for you
because I know you're interested in new
ideas also so what I want to frame
myself is interested in insights so
unlike some of your other gasps I'm not
an expert in complex thought or
complexity science but I'm interested in
what are the limitations of complexity
science can we push those limitations so
that we go even further what are the
fundamental assumptions that maybe
constrain complexity science and one of
the things that I've had insight into is
that I think that there's very few
complexity scientists are complex
thinkers who have integrated what I
would call process thinking into the
complexity sciences and I actually
googled that this morning and found the
only intersection between those two and
Google scholars was my own work so it
started to really crystallize for me
just recently that that's perhaps why
process philosophers don't really get me
and complex thinkers don't really get me
because I'm actually trying to see how
these two approaches to thinking
approaches to science approaches to
philosophy can stretch each other into
some
thing new so that would be an example of
how I'm always working with the
information science or the system's
thinking not just to work with it but to
understand it making it object of
inquiry and see if we can move these
boundaries into a different approach
that may be more profitable for
addressing some of the problems we have
today so this integration of complexity
thinking or complex thought in process
philosophy is what makes my work
different than some of the other
people's work in the space that sounds
really and think of I think as we both
know whenever you draw a circle around
something call it complexity science not
only do you restrict what's in but you
also build it on artificial barrier to
what's outside right so taking any given
circle that one's drawn around some
arbitrary area of content and then
looking at how that intersect with
what's outside of it is often very
generative let's just hop right into it
so I would say here my role is going to
sound like I'm a process thinker beating
up on complexity science but it's also
true that very few process thinkers and
what I mean by that is Alawite Head and
Griffin and Hartshorn and the whole
school very few of them have managed to
stretch outside of a process ontology
into complexity science there's a lot of
resonances so I don't think the stretch
is that hard but like you said people
tend to put themselves in a box or build
a boundary and then navigate through
their thought on the basis of the
assumptions that are defined by that
boundary so just saying that just so you
know it's gonna sound like I'm beating
up on complexity theory because I'm
going to represent more the process
space here and I think you can represent
the complexity space better they tumble
over each other they both have very
important ways to inform each other so
that's hopefully we can proceed that way
yeah that sounds great
I love active engagement at the boundary
between areas and sometimes that's the
most fruitful areas for investigation
yeah and so then in general what we're
going to be doing here Jim if we can
pull this out is a lot of thought
experiment and a lot of hybridization
and I would
call that insight practice because we're
actually trying to have insight into the
ways the perspectives were taking the
assumptions we're making we're looking
at the architecture of the thought we're
looking through these are all complex
metacognitive skills which i think is a
feature of most of the guests that you
have on this show that that we're
capable of doing that so this is really
cool so the first thing I would say and
some of this is not generous I'm just
trying to clear out some territory for
the audience and then you can say but
complexity science does do this in this
thing so some of its not generous and we
can build up from there so for example a
lot of complexity science has this
problem that process philosophy is very
wary of and that is reification so that
for example when we're thinking of a
certain type of systems
we're AFI it as if it has a boundary
that it's an object that can be
manipulated that I can act on the system
either by observing or experimenting
with it and yet it doesn't act back on
me so this is a process of reification
that process philosophy would have a
yellow flag for complexity science and
so for example you know it's very hard
to think of light as a wave without
thinking that it propagates through
something right there's a whole history
of the science of whether light had an
ether that it propagated through the
same way sound propagates through air so
in process philosophy we would say the
tendency toward having a subtle mental
model that there's an ether that light
propagates through that's the third term
that's the reification of a third term
in process philosophy is more
comfortable with just understanding that
you know light moves or a light is
movement or it is propagation and so
it's kind of the same move that Einstein
made where instead of gravity being a
force which is like a third term like
something you could go look for he saw
it as just the relative motion of
inertial different inertial frames right
so you see this moving process
philosophy is to go to the point where
everything is in motion with this
back to everything else nothing is D
animated there's no privileged position
outside of the system in which you can
look at it so it increases the
complexity and unbound the complex space
in a way that requires a level of
sophistication that I think is demanding
that's it thank you let me reply to that
let me see if I get what you were saying
correctly again and kind of put back
mode I'll suggest that what you describe
strikes me is exactly what science ought
to be which is model building right
anyone who tells you that science proves
Act you know the person's not a
scientist right because science never
proves anything right proved right what
it does is has you know contingent
theories that are have not been
falsified by experiment that are the
best knowledge we have at the moment but
if we look at the history of science
we're almost certain is incomplete and
or partially wrong so I think that
really the job of science is to build
models that have some come as much
congruence with reality as we can and
use those models to tell us something
about reality and then other people take
those models technologists and say all
right how can I use those models to
actually create some action or leverage
in reality so I would push back a little
man what you say is interesting and that
there is more to be said than just
science but within the container of
complexity science I would map the term
reification to model building and that's
what I would say is the main job of
science yeah so that pushback is
completely 100% received because I agree
with you I think that as long as we
understand that we are constructing
models and they're useful and they're
relevant and they carry us forward if we
understand that we are in the process we
are participating in the construction of
this model but it doesn't stop there
it's like a stepping stone and then from
there we can ask new questions we can
have different insights and we can carry
the enterprise of science forward not
only as a technology but as this double
step between insight and action
and I think action is definitely a
requirement because effective action
tends to simplify the search space
really fast so I tend to sound like a
complete theoretical person but I'm glad
you introduced me as an action person
too because when you're working in these
complex domains it's the action in the
world that can clarify and simplify yet
through model building and action what
the hell's going on truthfully that's
what it's all about really is acting in
the world I think we both also have an
interest in the science of consciousness
or consciousness more broadly and here
ok and my argument is consciousness is
nothing but a tool to help us more
effectively have action in the world and
science is another tool one of the
markers I want to put down and it might
help us have our discussion without
unnecessary conflict you know useful
conflict that's good but unnecessary
conflict isn't is that I am NOT a
scientific totalizer I don't think
everything is science by any means right
and you hear this argument against
science scientism some people call it
that people try to totalize science and
yeah there I'm sure there are people
that do that but I don't know any first
class scientists that do that you know
science is this thing it's a box it's a
model building that has congruence to
reality that looks for data and
experiments to falsify the models and
then create new models or improve the
models so they're not falsified and
that's what science is science is not
technology right it's very interesting
technology existed long before science
right you know you know the invention of
the plow the invention of Agriculture
the invention of the waterwheel now
science has amazingly accelerated
technology but it is a separate domain
and so the doing is to because not
science science builds the models and
then doers of various sorts whether
technologists or general empiricists you
know I consider technology to be a
subset of general empiricist and so we
then have technologists and other
classes of doers in which there are many
other classes including organizational
design as an example of a class of doing
that isn't really technology elite not
in the hard sense though in the sense of
taking scientific models let's say our
models of cognitive
clients and putting them to work one
could argue that organizational design
is a form of technology so with that as
some boundary setting a whole bunch of
things I have like four little clouds
word clouds here that came out of that
so in in terms of complexity science
what you've said I think it highlights
the role of action in complex domains so
if we look at some of the pools that
scientists have relied upon in the past
classical science we make if-then
propositions and if-then propositions
can create hypotheses hypotheses can
establish experimental design and then
we can test those if-then propositions
but when we get into the complexity
domain something really interesting is
happening with causality let's just keep
it at that right now maybe you want to
comment on that and these easy if-then
propositions
start to break up they're not adequate
to facing complexity and so what we see
with people that are working in the
complex domain is this return to action
action in probing and sensing these are
all words that we associate with the
body and empiricism observation action
probing sensing pattern recognition and
you start to see science as returning or
evolving to more roots in action sensory
motor action and that's interesting that
the way you kind of put what I was
saying before together and highlighted
actions almost like we're being pushed
now to rediscover the domain of inquiry
that has to do with our sensory motor
perception capacities and maybe you
could comment on that a lot of good
things you talk about causality one of
my favorite topic and this is where
complexity science really does open up a
whole new field of inquiry and I like to
point out to people that least in my
mind the gateway from previous
reductionist science to complexity
science was the mathematical field of
deterministic chaos if you actually look
at some of the people involved in the
earliest pre-work in complexity many of
them came through deterministic chaos
and for the members of the audience who
don't understand or don't know
about deterministic chaos it essentially
means that in systems of even
surprisingly little complexity but some
level of complexity that are entirely
deterministic the actual trajectory of
the system over time is very very very
wildly based on the initial conditions
so that while in theory the old
laplacian Newtonian model that oh I
could have every I knew every position
and every motion of every particle in
the universe I could predict all of time
going forward in theory even if that
were true which it probably isn't
then deterministic chaos means it can't
practically be done even an
extraordinarily simple system like the
Lorenz attractor or a three body problem
and orbital mechanic the tiniest
difference in the initial conditions way
below the level of human capability to
measure results in very different
trajectories so that basically overthrew
that laplacian view of the world as
mechanism at least from a practical
perspective and that's basically just
math right it turns out that you can
mathematically do deterministic chaos in
very sound system so then that basically
led to okay what else does that lead to
and in this case it basically to my mind
said that causality is way flip rear of
a concept than we thought it is right
and as we've exposed and explored in
complexity science we've run into two
kind of related phenomena the first is
emergence right still the biggest
question in complexity science what
exactly is emergence and what can we
really truly say about it what can we
say about it that might actually be
useful for the applied people to cause
emergencies of some sort of that are you
that are useful in the world and and
essentially emergence again for folks is
how do very low-level phenomena somehow
promote themselves to higher level of
phenomena let's take like an organism as
a fine example of an emergent property
at the bottom you and I are both just
atoms jingling around right somehow
those atoms become embedded in chemistry
they turn Munda molecule create basic
chemistry the basic chemistry is
involved in a very complex and network
of biochemistry which eventually results
in metabolism
which then results in cells cells
organize and classify themselves as
tissues tissues become organs organs
become system systems become organisms
and organisms are embedded in ecosystem
and emergence what's that all about when
we get to causality my other favorite
slippery topic is top-down cause Alan
what the hell could that mean so in the
case of the human one could say the fact
that some specific atoms and say one of
your red blood cells is contained inside
of a ecosystem a organism tissue systems
etc mean that those atoms will behave
very differently than they would if they
were just on their own floating around
and say the ocean and so one could say
that the cause of the behavior of those
atoms is considerably constrained and
define defines too strong but let's like
constrained by the fact they're embedded
in this hierarchical Tower so I guess
that would be great because this is
where complexity thinking use in process
spot no process relational process
thinking is as complexity is it's a
aesthetic discipline so we need to try
to integrate them so process thinking
would say that the the paradox of
emergence and top-down causality comes
from the limitations of complexity
thinking so let me reframe that and see
if we can work with these two concepts
in a way that we don't get these kinds
of conundrums that you so well
articulated so for emergence for example
we can look at when you tackle the
problem of emergence the way you do and
you construct these larger and larger
levels this is something that process
philosophy would say is your reifying a
level your reifying the larger system so
how can we work with emergent systems
let's say just using that as a
placeholder and not do that so one of
the easy ways we can do is we can say
that there are developmental processes
and their evolutionary processes and
every agent that is
developing its own creative advance it's
doing novel things at probing it's
bumping into things it's doing that
within a developmental feel the human
body is the developmental field for the
molecules the same molecule and a
different kind of environment is going
to exercise different affordances so
you're going to get patterns emergent
patterns that are different because you
have you have action inside
developmental fields now it gets more
complicated than that because the
developmental fields themselves are also
evolving and this is kind of what
Stephen Jay Gould says that organisms
develop within developmental fields in
the developmental fields evolve and he
argued that with these two if you really
understand the two pattern dynamics the
two dynamics and how they relate to each
other
then this is what emerges so he would
say that emergence of new species has
happens because you have developmental
potentials that are codependent upon the
fields in which they're developing which
changes and evolves a developmental
field so you get changes that are are no
longer progressive and developmental you
get changes that look like leaps and
that's what emergence is it's a change
that doesn't look continuous with the
micro States and the micro changes from
which it arises and that's because there
has been a change in the field in which
those protocols or actions have been
taking and so just working with
evolutionary developmental theory which
tries to use both these dynamics I think
helps explain some of these logics of
emergence that we're trying to deal with
instead of stacking them up like levels
of a train or something it's the same
thing with top-down causality process
philosophy would say that the human is
the third term the human is not this
top-down agent that then looks back on
its own system and makes decision for it
that the sense of being a human or an
individual agent is already a result of
the micro States and the micro actions
in all these various levels it is an
outcome or
Prada of its own generative arising so
if you have to train your mind not to
say but then I can get up and walk
across the room but the whole I can get
up and walk across the room is itself
arising from these micro states and
micro potentials and the evolving
landscape of my body as a developmental
field for all its participants so we
have to be careful too because I can use
the term developmental feel that I don't
mean an external environment I mean the
patterns of engage Latian of all the
participants are in a sign as a stable
enough pattern to say my body within in
reality the more I investigate the
further all into the world I have to go
and so I'm exchanging oxygen with other
plants and animals and the environment
that that oxygen or that air is in is
also developmental field and it goes on
and on there is there was actually once
you get going no boundary but just for
the purpose of studying or in talking or
investigating we have to try to use
words that are placeholders for open
participation in the whole ah very good
thing I wouldn't say it was anything
that you said that I firmly disagree
with and in fact I think there it was
mostly a different Lauren's on the same
thing I think there are some things that
you missed I like to bring up and get
your reaction to first talking about
reification I think in science we often
call that coarse-grain right the world
is essentially continuance and
infinitely variable at low enough level
of analysis but to say eautiful things
it often is important to coarse-grain
because for instance trying to define
how a you know a 777 Boeing jet works at
the level of atoms is impossible right
literally it would take they've turned
the whole universe into computronium ie
the highest possible effective computer
you still couldn't simulate it at that
levels practically impossible so instead
you have to look at it as aerodynamics
at the level look at a wind tunnel can
do or a computer simulation of a window
I talk about combustion in the engine at
the
of combustion engineering you know the
driving of the turbine at the level of
kind of intersection of combustion
engineering and air flow dynamics etc
and so in going back to our model
example called a human or a mammal
doesn't really matter it's there are
some clear to me at least useful and
important reification is if you want to
call that i'd call it horse training
they're relatively clear-cut for
instance in the biological stack a cell
is pretty damn clear-cut right it's
what's inside the cell membrane and and
it's also can be looked at
thermodynamically the rate at which
chemicals interact with each other those
inside the membrane interact at a much
higher rate with each other than they do
with those that are outside the membrane
and indeed what the membrane is a semi
formula membrane which allows a certain
amount and at a certain rate of chemical
flow between the inside and the outside
but both mathematically and physically
and when functionally you can say that
this line of the cell membrane is a very
useful coarse graining and the world
inside and outside are very different
next is the individual it's go all the
way up to the top nearly at the top of
the stack which is an individual animal
to my mind is quite well-defined I mean
this is an argument I remember having at
the lunch table in junior high school
with a couple other smart nerds right is
what is life you know what is the what
really is me and over the years I've
heard lots of blather on the topic and
I've concluded that it's actually pretty
sharp that one could say that me is that
stop which is in biochemical homeostasis
on the time order of a second or two ie
that part which is exchanging oxygen
removing co2 delivering nutrients etc on
a timescale of a second or two so for
instance that model says my fingernails
are not me
they are not receiving nutrients and
oxygen and are not part of this you know
- second time frame homeostasis neither
is my hair
but my hair follicles are so it's
actually a reoccurring or a reef
occation went to call it that that's
actually very useful I can now say this
is me very high I don't wanna extend
this term because I have two things that
I want to say that important parts of
process philosophy I mean this
conversations going is great because for
what you just said process philosophy
has this notion of duration so you were
talking about temporal frames of Bayeux
seconds or something like that and in
process philosophy an agent or can be
identified by the duration of its
arising and falling so like a proton has
a half-life it has a duration so in
process philosophy the scales are not
spatial like you were building up cell
molecules the cells to humans there are
temporal durations and so for example my
conscious identity has a duration I can
witness it coming and going in
meditation there's a certain rhythm to
conscious thought that comes it's
discontinuous if we look at it really
careful so the eye that is me is we call
reification or coarse-grain but it is
certainly identifiable as you are saying
by your duration whereas my fingernails
are durable or their duration is more
related to maybe some come physical
rhythms so you could think of a duration
as a human lifetime for the human body
that's a little simplistic but that's
one movement what you were working at is
a move that process philosophy takes it
d spacial eise's complexity and goes
into this sense of things are rising and
falling with a signature duration and
this is true at all what we would call
scales using spatial terms so so that's
one thing that it would be great if you
you know continue to think about that
and you'll start to feel more into a
process orientation now the other thing
you said and this is gets you know some
of this gets hard to wrap your head
around because it process philosophies
really a different way of thinking but
if you look at coarse graining and fine
graining
and so if I wanted to try to explain a
airplane at the level of quantum
fluctuations you're right it's
impossible so we say we're going to
coarse-grain we're going to look at
things as objects as persistent in time
blah blah blah but what's interesting
when we move down to the smaller parts
if I move from myself to my cells myself
to molecules we are actually entering
much larger domain can you see what I'm
saying so for example the iron in my red
blood cells the hemoglobin in my red
cells has iron in it and even I though I
use the term in this little piece of
iron is in my cells it's actually made
in the in where stars are made in these
cosmological fields and I would like to
think that right now that iron is no
longer in that cosmological field but it
is and so process philosophy is really
suspect about what's inside of what so
it seems like that little piece of iron
in my hemoglobin is small enough to fit
inside of me like dandy fits in a box
but process philosophy doesn't bound
things like that it says iron is a
cosmological process and it exists in
this developmental field also that I
would call me but it's still part of the
cosmological process it doesn't cease to
be part of the cosmological trajectory
of iron itself anymore than the protons
in that iron ceased to have their
signature half-life and so the
categories of existence that were
interested in in process philosophy seem
to defy this notion of what smaller and
what's larger because these processes
are not inside me as smaller pieces of
candy inside a box they're what we call
internally related to me this is not the
same as being spatially inside and this
means that the cosmological process
internally related to me without which I
could not be me and then there's
external relations too so we switch from
insights and outsides which is a very
concrete metaphor doesn't not adequate
to process relational terms in this
notion of duration and internal and
external relationships and we start to
stretch out the notion of our
participation so I loved what you were
kind of saying that thing because if we
find grain we're actually working with
much larger processes and then we see
that then quantum fluctuations are not
in the plane the plane is in the quantum
fluctuations because the quantum
fluctuations is much larger domain it's
a cosmological domain I'm not saying
that this is very clear I'm just trying
to give you a taste of how process
philosophy can enter into complexity
science and some of these ideas of
coarse graining and really hybridize and
catalyze the field of thought and
science and let's pursue the example of
iron's and I'd clear one we all know
those of us who've studied little
astrophysics to know that iron is indeed
created in the late stages of certain
larger stars and we are all Stardust as
it turns out and some of the other ones
are only created in supernovas so that
we are not only starred us but we're
also supernova dust and so those atoms
of iron were distributed a couple of
billion years before the earth came into
existence probably and the Sun and those
iron molecules some number of them that
ended up being captured by the
gravitational concentration that was the
Sun ended up being captured in that disk
and some of them ended up being captured
in the gravitationally attracted entity
limit of being the earth and some of
them have been extracted by biological
processes and ended up in ourselves I
think that's certainly true on the other
hands interesting you brought up time
scale so I think that's really a good
tool for differentiating you know the
the activity of cells is on the
of microseconds you know the chemical
operations of metabolism microseconds
and below that and so the model of the
cell or the cell itself if we want to
reify it let's call it the model of the
cell on the micro second level is
essentially entirely independent of the
cosmological evolution of iron and so if
I'm trying to understand the amazingly
complex mess that a cell is I can safely
at you know at the level of microseconds
the level of metabolism I can it can
safely ignore very long time frame
phenomena like the Astrophysical
creation of iron it's just not relevant
because there there's nothing about it
that's relevant on the same level the
the half-life of the neutrons in iron I
don't really need to worry about either
and certainly not in proton so the class
I check protons didn't have a half-life
was least not clear so when you're
thinking about the timeframe of analysis
so that you're not just overwhelmed by
way too much detail it seems to me
perfectly reasonable to just say yes it
is true that iron was is part of an
ongoing process in fact by the way the
eventually the earth will get eaten by
the Sun and the Sun will turn into a I
guess it's a neutron star eventually and
maybe it'll get collided with something
else and become a supernova or get eaten
by a black hole and something will
happen that an iron yeah that's all true
over billions of years but when I'm
looking at what's happening in the cell
microsecond by microsecond or
millisecond by millisecond that's just
not useful or relevant right so the move
though here and whether we can make it
illustrate it as profitable is to look
at the scales of duration rather than
the scale of what's course instead of
looking at spatially grained we're
looking at temporal graininess the
raishin of the cell what's relevant to
its duration it's arising and coming you
know in process philosophy and another
aspect of duration is a synchronous
arising and falling so if all my cells
you know the cell lives for X number of
years different cells for different
years but
my epithelial cells don't live very long
but if all my epithelial cells died at
the same time I would be dead right so
it's the fact that we are not only
working with different durations but
they're all the arising and falling of
these durations are asynchronous and
it's why process philosophy can use
models and patterns and call them
structures and systems because as an
individual cell is born its entrained by
the pre-existing rhythms of its society
of cells so that the structure holds
together it's kind of like the old
Buddhist story of you know you take a
bow and you replace one side and then
you replace the other side and then you
place the mass and then replace the
floor and do you still have the same
boat but it's this notion that the
patterns hold because things are coming
and going in communion with their
societies that are persistent the other
patterns essentially there are patterns
that are persistent right doctor let me
suggest a movie I'd love to get your
reacts to this instead of talking about
faith and time what about if we talk
about network and time all right
networks are topological and a dynamic
network certainly has a time dimension
and again let's use this example of a
living organism and the definition I
chose to use to define the individual is
basically that collection of cells which
is connected to one or two second time
depth network of nutrients and gases and
that's all a very interesting network
and you know Geoffrey west out of Santa
Fe Institute has written a bunch of good
stuff on the mathematics and the physics
of how that plumbing actually works
really if somehow I had itself from my
body that was 20 feet away but it was
connected to this near-real-time Network
I could say topologically and in time
binding it is part of me so I'm not so
interested in space but rather the
network you know it's interesting
because in process philosophy we would
talk more about functional relationships
it's really kind of
one or half dozen of another because
what you called it a dynamic network and
that's what I would say is functional
relationships it's different than nodes
and connection right so nodes and
connections are like I can connect
training wheels to my bicycle
I don't know life out of that but those
are not a functional relationship
functional relationship and process
philosophy is a relationship that makes
a difference in both directions that
constrains possibilities and actually
also creates new possibilities and so if
we look at networks that way if we look
at the human body as a system of
functional relationships that both
constrain and enable new relationships
or ongoing relationships so we could say
carry them forward so nothing can stay
the same although that patterns can
reiterate then we're getting close to
the notion of a network and process
thinking good I had a suspicion that
putting out the move of thinking about
networks rather VAP might be useful for
convergence yeah thinking and again just
to make it clear for you know this model
analogy we've been using the network I
had in mind here is essentially the
circulatory system which delivers oxygen
and nutrients to the cells and takes
from the cells waste product and co2
delivers the co2 to the lungs to be
exhaled delivers the toxicities to
deliver to be further processed and
disposed of and operates in the opposite
direction bringing nutrients from the
intestines to the cells and bring oxygen
to the cells and anything that is not in
real-time in near-real-time 2 seconds
coupled to that network is not a living
cell that it's part of me and so there
we unify this site this concept of the
identity of an individual as a
collection of lower level entities cells
which are reasonably well defined at the
cell membrane level with membership in a
single Network this network of gases and
nutrients essentially yes so I think
that's sufficiently coarse-grained to be
almost like a complicated
you know the way you've this attaches to
that and then this moves to that but
what happens at the interfaces of the
elite Olevia are in the lungs and that
gas is really very complex we're getting
more into the territory of complexity
one of the things if we could pivot here
and maybe kind of move into a different
model one of the things I like to do is
in my presentations when I talk about
self-organization I show a picture of
the ribosome the ribosome is a very
complex intracellular piece of machinery
really that has no agent in it it's a
sub cellular system it's a very complex
piece of machinery has to do all kinds
of complex things like identifying and
detecting and pacing itself in looking
at threshold events and micro States of
course it's required for the DNA to
replicate itself unravels it's a station
where the DNA and Revels and messenger
RNA finds its own positions and there
I'm not really exactly sure about all
the terms anymore but for me the
question is how does this system self
organize in where it itself does not
have DNA it is the machinery on which
DNA is replicated so what are the
principles or their protocols that are
guiding this self-organization and this
is you know now this to me is where we
get into like really trying to
understand self-organization and human
systems as something that's much more
complex than single agent decision make
something else is seems to be going on
so I didn't know if you had any thoughts
about that
oh yeah it's there's lots of interesting
things and part problems in conundrum
around how life came to be and I said
conversation I still vividly had
remember having with Stewart Kaufman out
at Santa Fe Institute I first got out
there
like we talk for four hours my own area
of scientific true discipline or I
actually know something fairly deep is
evolutionary computation which is the
using evolutionary methods to do useful
compensate computations at the same time
using mathematical models to explore
evolution and one of the things that
sorta both you know had strong
congruence on is that evolution of the
roughly Darwinian sort thing as the
machinery not necessarily evolution of
life but the roughly Darwinian style of
evolution whether it's mimetic or
whether it's software whether it's life
does not work very well under a high
rate of error and in fact you can in a
model system you can accurately
determine the so called error threshold
where when error when the error rate
called the mutation rate is above act
the ability to build through evolution
is rather rather weak in fact so weak
that it's hard to see how a group of
chemicals in the warm pond a la Darwin
could have evolved far enough to produce
us in a mere four billion years but
somewhere along the line the whole
precision replication technology of the
cell not just the ribosome with ribosome
being one of the most important one but
the machinery for replicating DNA itself
error correcting it making sure that
information was replicated at a higher
rate than the error catastrophe rate ie
lower the ie the mutation rate became
lower than the error threshold suddenly
evolution became a very powerful ratchet
and the thing we talked about for four
hours was how in the hell did that very
complex machinery get built by evolution
from a evolutionary substrate that had a
higher mutation rate than the air
catastrophe and we never did solve it
right nobody ever has in fact we both
left it at the damn big mystery right
in fact other one of my great mentors
Harold Moore with will the foremost
thinkers in the origin of life written
several books on the topic he at the end
of his life after working on it for 60
eard also didn't know the answer to that
still and he was still open to the idea
that it was panspermia that that little
bit of intentional technology may have
come from spate and you know even though
he was an atheist he also was very
interested in religion in fact this is
quite humorous
he was the scientific adviser to the
Cardinal American College of Bishops
fight being both Jewish by tradition and
an atheist in practice he nonetheless
was very interested in the religion
effective and he a lot of tiny little
sliver of possibility for somehow
something beyond the natural may have
somehow helped create this indispensable
bit of machinery so as a love the
longest side but I think it's good
because I think in this this
conversation we might be pulling out
more questions and conundrums than facts
and explanations but maybe that will
serve your audience in this podcast
really well so in terms of pulling
causality out of space you know one of
the terms that I've used to talk about
causality in truly complex systems is I
use the term numinous causality and it's
a little bit of a hedge because the word
numinous also slightly connotes
something that is either
extraterrestrial or metaphysical or
religious as a religiosity in the term
numinous and i think that it's a good
term because he always as you described
your friend
we often get to this place of well it
must be something in that domain this
domain of mystery or magic call it magic
reality but what I mean by numinous is
that it's simultaneously everywhere and
nowhere at the same time that we have a
sense that there is causality in the
system in or that there's that the
system is causal implications or or
agents are causally
implicated with their actions and
vice-versa but at the level of
complexity there is a sense that the
causality is so distributed everywhere
and and nowhere at the same time but
that's just the term I use this term
numinous causality probably a good thing
to have a discussion about because my
operational model is to reject all
things numinous unless there is
substantial proof for their existence
and so I define my exploration is in the
real scientific domain and attempted ly
to see how far we can go with that now
as we know maybe the scientific mission
isn't up to it but so far it hasn't
failed so I resist the temptation that
would take what I would call the easy
move and construct metaphysical entities
to resolve gaps in our knowledge in fact
fight that fairly vehemently in things
that I'm involved with
I think it's look at the history of the
human race it's been one of the things
that's held humans back is the easy
tendency to retreat to the numinous when
it when yet and this is I love to point
this out whatever time whenever the
numinous and the scientific have
collided and overlapped the scientists
were always right Thor did not cause
thunder right Zeus did not throw
lightning bolts
you know life turned out not to be the
force VTOL whatever was you know every -
every single time without exception when
the numinous and the scientific overlap
it was the science that was proven right
in the numinous that was shown to be
just some story somebody made up and so
I strongly resist that move on the other
hand being of a scientific realist
temperament if somebody can provide real
evidence of it solid irrefutable
reproducible evidence that there is some
numinous effect which again something
like harald still allowed a tiny tiny
tiny percentage for that being the
original life
probability of that being original I'm
open to it but I you know resist the
move early and I believe it's looking at
the history of humanity it's been a very
detrimental set of tools because
unfortunately we seem to have been
evolved to be suckers for it right
people love that
right even though I got god damnit why
are they such suckers I mean look at the
existence of all the organized religions
right every single one of them just
total pure horseshit as far as I can see
and yet majority humans on earth believe
one or the other and if we believe the
anthropologists there's been 10,000 or
more incompatible metaphysical systems
that have existed in the in human
history I'm sure it's way more than that
that's a coarse graining you get to
10,000 they're all mutually inconsistent
and yet people live and die and kill for
them so I guess I'm putting up a big yo
lay down when you when you make the
numinous move yeah yes so that's you
know and I think you know I call it
numinous causality because I'm hedging
it tends to want you to go and create a
third term with some kind of
metaphysical term but it still has kind
of real-life causal features or aspects
to it but I'm gonna ask you a question
do you think given enough time that the
complex systems that we're studying will
eventually prove to have specifiable
linear or direct causations don't know
put down a small bet I would say kind of
like deterministic chaos and maybe able
to show that there probably is something
like direct causality but it's beyond
the scale of humans and the whole
universe converted the computor own IAM
to say anything very specific about it
yeah so that that's very close to what I
call numinous causality that it's it's
it everywhere and or at the same time so
process philosophy has this cool move
and again we're not gonna be able to
solve the problem I just want to open
the search base with this kind of new
orientation so in process philosophy
for you go and if you do a thought
experiment in process philosophy and you
say what are the three what are the most
fundamental things I need to start out
with it derived this universe as best we
know it this this all this stuff will
process philosophy says you you only
need three things and then you'll see
I'll get back to the numinous causality
and and to your point
you're a very valid point so process
philosophy says you only need three
things so number one you need something
even if it's just a placeholder to start
with so you can call it process or
potential or some kind of movement some
kind of potential our language is you
have to start somewhere
so this is just axiomatic you you have
this is our starting place so process
philosophies this process which is like
potential number two you have to have
this process has to be self
differentiating and another way or a
simpler way to say that it has to be
asymmetric so if you think of it as a
feel it has to be self differentiating
or you can even simplify that and say it
has to be it has some asymmetry in it
now these two alone can create a lot of
stuff a lot of stuff can happen but what
we also need it could create a lot of
stuff but there would be no awareness
without a third term we would not be
aware that their cosmos exists and the
third thing we need is the self
differentiating parts need to
participate with each other so in
process philosophy you can derive the
whole universe from three principles or
protocols that there is process or
movement or dynamism or creative
potential that that has to self
differentiate or another way to say that
it's got to have a symmetric properties
and the self differentiating parts need
to participate so that you have
awareness of difference than you have
all the
so the stuff that's in the world but the
interesting thing about processed
philosophy is once this system gets
started you cannot assume that the
original process field or the process
blenheim exists anymore it could
actually self differentiate into more
and more parts that then are you know in
relation to each other in this case they
have the original potential field is all
internally related to the parts which is
why we have a parent causality and so in
this case it's very similar to what
you're talking about
in terms of deterministic chaos because
it could be the case that you could
never trace back the causal origins of
the universe because they don't actually
exist it's kind of like it does the
first amoeba exists
well you can't find it but it it
persists or subsist as as Whitehead
would call it so there is a case to be
made fairly similar to what you're
saying is that the though these complex
systems are causally implicated but
they're the causal origins cannot be
found because they subsist they do not
actually exist so this is a way another
way that process philosophical thinking
can understand some this this kind of
important conundrum it's interesting not
to ponder that some it doesn't again
necessarily direct me as contrary to my
own approach but it might so I have to
think about it a little bit here and
maybe I'll ask some questions and if I
were to turn it around and say you know
where's the universe come from and what
is it again taking a scientific realist
approach the best we know today is we
had a Big Bang 13.8 billion years ago
that had specific attributes to it this
specific universe had attributes and one
of my earlier guess when the most
interesting shows I did I think was Lee
small one the who works both on the very
small and very large you know he has a
working hypothesis that the other lots
of universes and universes are formed
basically out the back end to black
holes etc and each universe is different
has different laws of physics different
sizes etc some are interesting some
aren't and they even hypothesizes very
loosely an evolution of universes
towards a specific sort that are more
second and that our universe is probably
one of those and so I wouldn't
necessarily sign on to his theory but I
would go one step short of that and say
our universe had some specific
attributes at the beginning one of which
was a gigantic energy flux yeah so that
would be like my process just some to
start with something yeah right and then
I then I look at Brigantine right and
his cool of complexity which is by the
way not the Santa Fe Institute one when
I bring up per ego gene at SFI people
always you know bad right I go yeah but
I disagree I say Ferengi gene has some
very interesting things to say
fundamentally is that interesting things
only happen in the case the you know
your word asymmetric or in his case and
for me energy flows yeah right any
system at equilibrium nothing
interesting is going to happen right
it's just flat right and when there's an
energy flux there's the opportunity at
least for complexity to emerge and what
he calls dissipative systems and this is
controversial but his theory is the
universal wants for those systems that
can use up the energy flux and think
about that it's kind of interesting you
know what is life but a complicated bit
of machinery to use up the energy flux
from the Sun and so where he was where
you would say self differentiating
asymmetric phenomena he would say energy
disequilibrium which happens to have
been a specific attribute of our
particular universe and then physical
evolution occurred but and this is where
I would get back to my conference with
Coffman only up to a certain level and
we talked about differentiation the
interstellar dust and gases for instant
are quite differentiated right we can we
can find all kinds of interesting and
complicated chemistry that has occurred
in the interstellar gas driven by energy
fluxes for Frigga gene from stars
interacting with probably just hydrogen
initially but also now spiced up with
the results of supernovae and there's
been an evolution of sorts chemical
evolution but at a very slow rate and it
just produces kind of somewhat
interesting dust as far as we know then
we get to can think of all this another
conversation I had on my show with David
Krakauer who defines his field of study
as the history of information processing
in the universe you know we got up to a
point where there's some freakish Indian
evolution up to a point but then it kind
of stopped and the universe was a
physical thing until like a life were
analog the lights I mean there may be
lots of life and they were things that
are analogous to life in the universe
that we have no comprehension of but
let's just use the one thing we do know
about that life fundamentally moved the
ability of evolution to do to explore
new space to a radically new level you
know good old earth without any life had
it has some dynamic you know has some
complexity dynamic plate tectonic etc
but they're not going to produce a 777
or a solar cell or or write a
Shakespearean play or anything out or
fall in love or anything else somehow
getting back to this magical
transcending of the era catastrophe a
bright line appeared at some point and
an evolutionary system that had much
greater information processing occurred
and life moved forward from that point
relatively rapidly to where we are today
and I like to throw down another
line that occurred sometime in the last
a couple hundred thousand years maybe
the last ten thousand years and that is
language which is another new even way
more powerful means of information
processing than life itself
which has opened up a radically new
domain for evolution of interesting
phenomena in the universe are those two
ways of thinking about but I think that
it's like you know I like the story it
makes sense but I think the story cuts
the scenes the scenes are cut too
strongly because life is a cosmological
process it's not like the cosmological
process is happening in the background
now over here our scene to something
more interesting is happening
you can't just it is it is part of the
duration of the cosmological process
itself things evolve as a whole so I
think that saying that well this was
true and and in the physiological the
cosmological physical universe that
wasn't that interesting until life game
these processes are subtended in life
itself it's not like that scene you know
the way the story was you told it pretty
quickly but those scenes are cut too
quickly and it's the same with language
language evolves not on top of life
language is the enduring evolution of
life in the same way that life is the
enduring evolution of the cosmic Osmos
those cuts are to I think tooth they're
too severe and I think they're useful
they're useful at a certain level of
analysis maybe that's a coarse graining
problem but I think when we are asking
some of these larger existential
questions those cuts are very unhelpful
let me address that specifically like to
my mind when I look at the history of
the universe of the universe prior to
life and afterlife look very different
in the you know the level of complexity
which could evolve and we could look at
some smaller
lines like the specific multicellular
technology that was developed around the
Cambrian explosion that's a specific
technology that evolved and once it
reached a critical mass essentially all
vertebrate life came out of that one
particular innovation so I suppose what
I'm what I see is that the history of
the universe is contingent and based on
some specific inventions along the way
and that on both sides of why it's very
different
before that Cambrian innovation life
looked very different than it did after
the universe looked very different
before life and after and I would say
that modern cognition which I'm gonna
say is coincident with language looks
very different than even homo sapiens or
it's not Homo sapiens our earliest ants
are close relatives and humans you know
at chimpanzee is not going to design a
Boeing 777 right a chimpanzee is not
going to write a Shakespearean sonnet
it's just completely qualitatively
different and I think that it's actually
very useful to look at the qualitative
transitions in the history of
information processing and that they
tell us huge amounts about what's going
on and maybe even you know what we
should be thinking about as our purpose
as yeah so so it just I'm gonna argue
with you here this is cool
so yes the universe has language now
people don't have language the universe
has language without all the background
processes there would be no people
having language took universes
coterminous continuous in the languaging
that people do this is too too hard a
cut I was sitting once with people that
you know actually here I won't name
names and we were talking about the
singularity and people were kind of
computing when the
processing speed of AI was going to
outdo the processing speed of the human
brain
well actually turns out that's not very
difficult to outdo at least the
cognitive processing of the brain it's
it's not very powerful but what I said
is so you're gonna take the 16 to 42
bits a second that the conscious brain
can calculate and then you're going to
compare that to the rate of computation
and machine of course it's it's there's
no comparison but you have to include in
the human system the information in the
ribosomes the information in the DNA the
information in each cell the information
in the whole evolutionary trajectory of
everything that's happened to compose a
human and then calculate that against
the computation of computer and then
there's no comparison
you can't just bracket out this little
layer of reality and call that the
evolved human the evolved human is a
duration and time so the human being is
its duration is from the Big Bang to its
point in history now that's its
complexity it's this whole it's spread
out through the its whole Cosmo Genesis
and you can't and so yes the mind wants
to make a cut this is completely
different this is act 2 scene 3 now we
have humans on the stage earlier in act
1 they weren't on the stage so this is
this is a way our mind works that's I
would say structurally reify events away
from the processes that generate them so
i could say for example what's more
complex the cow or the mycorrhizae in
the soil that the cow depends upon I'll
be careful
what's more complex that's hard to say
you'd have to do the calculations well
but but so that's kind of kind of what
you're saying is the language that
people speak more complex than the
generative pole that produced people in
language in the first place so in
process philosophy with two definitions
of complexity we have realized
complexity
like the cow and then we have generative
complexity so the cows could die and the
mycorrhizae would still create grass and
then potentially a new animal grazing
animal would evolve but if all the grass
and mycorrhizae died everything would
die so now what we have to do is switch
from from simple categories to process
categories there's different types of
complexity there's there's there's
realized actual the complexity of
language and then there's a generative
complexity all of which is required not
only to originate that but to uphold it
if if the cosmos died if if every
element I don't know what if every if
every quantum fluctuation stopped there
would be no language it's cool to Google
the evolutionary tree now they have this
big wave of a tree and then humans are
at the end it has extinction events and
then it says in the side it says this is
the evolutionary tree from the vantage
point of humans who are at the end but
if you look at it from the vantage point
of the bacteria
they've been evolving just as long and
humans are here over here just this
little side thing so we tend to think as
humans have evolved on top of the
bacteria but everything living today
it's evolved the same amount of time
right absolutely a point I make all the
time right that a dog is just as evolved
as a human right there exactly they're
all and to your point archaea or
bacteria has all evolved for an equal
period of time however this is where I
think we can use a cleaver to make the
cut remember we talked earlier about
action right and what are the actions
that these entities can do you know my
Corazon my coryza
are not going to make milk but a cow
can't right and so they have different
actions and humans have with once they
transition to language and then science
and technology have opened up an
unbelievable action potential which were
capable of which we have no idea what
the
sorry yet now of course some of those
actions are very dangerous and we're on
a road that if we're not careful you
know we may very substantially damaged
the earth and the ecosystems to a degree
that we could likely unless we change
our ways that this is going to happen
but on the other hand we have the action
a capability to get ourselves past that
problem I hope and take us to very very
very far ways that we can't even
envision at this point and so the action
capability on the other side of this
quite bright line of language is
qualitatively different from the cow
which is qualitatively different from my
coryza
and so that's where I think and what you
say is true yes
we're dependent on everything yes if
suddenly all the protons decided to
break down yeah you know game over right
and I can't tell you that won't happen
how the hell should I know
right how should anybody know but I
don't really care from a perspective of
the lifetime of a human I suspected
exceedingly unlikely so I'm just gonna
ignore it you know on the other hand our
micro Raisa better damn well take take
good care of that one of the things I'm
most proud of on our farm is how we have
massively improved the soil since we
bought it thirty years ago it was a very
depleted Mountain farm that had been
over grazed and over farmed and you know
we built up back to soils via organic
processes for 30 years and not only do
we have a couple inches more soil than
we did before but very active biome in
the soil and oh by the way bird we're
producing three and a half times as much
hay as we used to so you know very aware
of the stack of dependencies I would say
the stack of dependencies is very
different than the affordances that
these these qualitatively different
levels provide yeah so I like that stack
of dependencies and maybe we can we can
move on to some practical things because
one of the things that I talk a lot
about you may disagree with it it's
useful anyways I think in terms of
organizations and doing things like
improving the
soyal and working on a farm is when we
get into true complexity we realize if
we have emergent patterns we could say
the healthy cow is an emergent
phenomenon from healthy mycorrhizae
that's not that's a bad metaphor but if
we have emergent patterns it's important
to understand that you can't work at the
level of the pattern itself so what i
would describe you're working at the
level the mycorrhizae is you work at the
level of the protocols is that the stat
is the lower in the stack of
dependencies that then code for the
health of the next level and for me part
of the practicality of working with
complexity is to understand at what
level of that stack using your terms is
there the most leverage point and I
think one of the things that we do in
organisations and we do in terms of
these hyper complex problems we have
like climate or environment we try to
handle it or process it at the level
highest level of complexity which is the
emergent complexity rather than trying
to find what Daniel shmatte and Berger
would call the generator functions what
I call the protocols what are the
protocols that have which we have most
leverage and and so this is a little
different than a question for example
carbon
let's take carbon out of the air is not
working at the level of protocol that's
just working at a level of reactivity
you know there's too much carbon in the
air working at the level of protocols is
how can we amplify protocols that are
self catalytic so that they then create
these generative stacks of dependencies
rather than make them more precarious so
I think this is what farmers who are
working at the level of a soil
understand you know there's this great
little video a hundred thousand beating
hearts where this man changed his
conventional ranch into biodynamic or an
organic ranch and he found that in doing
so he actually restored the community he
had a local
farmers market and a butchery and stores
and basically he connected the dots that
growing the soil grew the community and
so to me the the field of complexity its
biggest promise is in trying to get us
to understand how to improve the staff
at the level that is most generative and
most catalytic for all the other other
levels I think that's a useful insight
but I would also put a warning
the biggest takeaway I would say the
biggest change in my personal highest
level model of the world from having
done a 20-year dive into complexity
science is epistemological and process
model one of the things that we learn
every time we've tried to examine
complex systems is unintended
consequences right we can't see very far
into a complex even a really rich
simulation you know if it's an honest
simulation will generally go be all over
the place lots of lots of noise in it in
fact compare that with called naive
Newtonian ism which unfortunately is
what 95% of adult Americans believe in
if they believe in anything that does
not foster epistemological humility you
know who think oh we can engineer our
way out of any problem right complexity
a perspective will tell us well we don't
exactly know but we can have some ideas
and we should look at inputs lower in
the stack to have inputs higher in the
stack but we should not have too much
hubris that we're right so we should
take an experimental and practitioners
approach to that in fact one of our
neighbors here Virginia guy named Joel
Salatin he's one of the big developers
of soil regeneration local agriculture
that it's Polyface farm
he's a very he's not a theorist at all
right he's a pragmatist and he has tried
various things and over his father
before him and over the last 50 years
they've come up with a series of
lower level interventions that produce
better soil and better pastures and
better cat we actually doesn't he does
do meet cattle he doesn't do dairy for
instance don't use broad-spectrum
herbicide use organic nutrients in the
soil
don't pasture for too long use multiple
species with short duration on any given
thing of pasture these were essentially
experimentally derived protocols which
took him you know fifty and fifty years
to develop and I would say that's a good
honest complexity perspective rather
than someone coming in and saying
alright this is what we need to do blah
blah blah blah blah blah blah and blah
because there's a good chance that
they're wrong yeah and also all these
experiments there's when you're working
at the lower levels of the stock that's
all very context dependent
right so the mycorrhizae in this area
versus the mycorrhizae in that area
versus the phase in which your land is
going through and its history all these
things are local context and so we need
a lot of these experiments in many
places happening in many places all the
time rather than some kind of best guess
at the global intervention that we as a
species should do I think this is this
is very good point that you're you're
talking to you know and I think that
it's funny that people like you and I
and your neighbors and my neighbors
after all our intellectual hubris let's
say instead of modesty that we are
working on these kinds of experiments
and and learning something about our
environment anew and and for me like I
was you know I did landscape design
building construction for 30 years and
we built beautiful gardens for the rich
and famous you know ones that look like
Versailles and were both ornamental and
and food production but there was it was
so labor intensive like this whole
approach was so labor intensive and then
I worked on a biodynamic farm and I
thought oh my god you'd have to be
to work this hard you know the the the
farm had fairly poor soils had been
grazed and so so for years just moving
from one failed experiment let's say to
the next and then we purchased this
property here and I set out some nice
vegetable gardens and herb gardens and
we have horses I would notice every year
I'd go up to the second year poop pile
and it'd be tomatoes growing as big as
the trees in there and and without any
kind of cultivation at all and then I
started doing experiments and noticing
how if I planted pumpkins the tomatoes
would follow the pumpkin vines down the
poop pile and so finally I don't know
why it took me so long finally I just
said to my husband I said let's just
take two-year-old poop and throw it on
that field let's just do that and I have
like a half an acre of self seeded
Tomatoes we I can't possibly eat enough
of them I don't water it I don't do
anything with it and I pumpkins and
acorn squash growing up the trees so
there's some hell that we are still
learning this again for the first time
or maybe we never knew it I don't know
but it is kind of humbling to think as a
species we are learning this again I
guess I always assumed we used to know
this obviously our ancestors knew it as
a form of practice to a greater or
lesser degree though on the other hand
the historical record full of people who
overshot their environments and died
right what's his name diamonds book is
gives some good examples and there's
many others
you know the Anasazi in the southwest
you know they're just it's just again
immens but temporarily reached
equilibrium with their environments but
unfortunately the Malthusian march of
population very often broke that like
one of my friends toward government very
distinguished archaeologists you know
said truth be known most primitive
peoples
once they developed agriculture more off
way more often than not lived at the
edge of starvation because the
Malthusian March was always pushing it
to the agree they made some breakthrough
in understanding their local environment
then they replicated too fast and oops
there we are just rats to ourselves up
to a bigger problem
one of the interesting things about our
current epoch is we actually finally
broke out of that for a short period of
time
we actually were able to more rapidly
build food than we built people and it
happened in two dimensions one our
scientific knowledge and our engineering
practices allowed us to very rapidly
ramp food productivity and miraculously
birth control got better at about the
same time as well as curious interesting
sociological phenomena that as people
get richer that they want to have less
children and so we're now on a
trajectory finally to a stable
population and probably a declining one
but unfortunately it's too damn high at
ten or eleven billion people but at
least we have given ourselves this short
period of time of freedom from the
Malthusian ratchet to try to build pools
to get to the other side and yeah that
seems to me what is you know just to
change directions entirely here this
seems to me what I'm so interested in
right now is the people who are doing
serious thinking about what comes next
what social operating system what does
it need to look like again with informed
by complexity and informed by I would
recommend they recommend epistemological
modesty what set of experiments should
we be running that we can evolve boards
a stable version of what comes next
which preserves all the great things
we've created over the last 400 years
but navigates them to something that's
truly sustainable for you know at least
a few millennia and that strikes me as
the number one challenge of our time
yeah and I agree with you I think I
often comment on the expectation
anticipation of world population peaking
I often like to think
what affordances what spaces and
potentials will be open when it actually
declines if it has a generative decline
a complete crash obviously could be
problematic I think that also because we
are complex life and life operates at
the edge of chaos you know far from
equilibrium I believe that that
projection is right where it must be at
maximum you know whether it's just
overshoot just slightly overshoot or not
it seems like as a lot of human a lot of
living systems the trajectory toward
that peak and the instability that it's
going to be encountered up to that peak
or right there at this very thin thread
at the edge of chaos you know that's a
story it's a mythology but I think that
it actually gives me hope this projected
release of population exponential growth
in population of course there's a lot of
local turbulence that happens because of
a lot of migration a lot of implications
for economies and stuff but is a as a
broad story I really find optimism in
that and yeah and so what is possible
what is possible should we be designing
today for that anticipated future
designing not only to survive this
transition phase to survive this
exponential complexity all these
increasing pressures on the system but
maybe that's the world we design for we
begin trying experimental design for
today this after the after the peak
population yeah I think that's a
youthful thought and the course we're
running the experiment right now I mean
there are already countries with the
climbing populate you know Germany I
think some of the Eastern European
countries Romania Bulgaria I think the
Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic
are declining Japan
just transitioning to decline and will
go very rapidly in the client as well
Korea and then China not far behind that
so we'll actually have some real time
experiments on what stresses do
declining and then of course fortunately
or unfortunately the very big change in
the age pyramid
doot-doot to it to societies we start
running those experiments right now and
it is potentially hopeful that on the
other side we have more room when such
that we could if over a period of a
couple hundred years build our
population down to two billion or
something at two billion we could
actually run a Western quality of life
with fully organic farming probably
right and we could certainly run a
carbon-free energy system etc probably
can't do those things at ten billion and
so it's hopeful to to know that there is
another side and on the other hand we
may not have that's the back side but
perhaps more immediately important is
how do we navigate over the next hundred
years to that peak without crashing yes
at them or at least that or at least
that the craft would be relatively small
we talked about this on the podcast or I
was the guest recently that fortunately
collapsed scenarios seem to follow a
fat-tailed distribution
fortunately and unfortunately it means
that there's gonna be more collapses
than you know Gaussian thinking would
lead us to believe but on the other hand
there will be more smaller collapses
than big collapses and so yeah maybe we
have a co-op for ten percent of the
world's population dies and that
provides a breathing base for the system
to then start to recover and and and the
collapses aren't always bad in their
outcomes you know the famous one was the
Black Death killed a third to forty
percent the population of Western Europe
and many historians point to that
opening up as the end of as what brought
the end of feudalism the beginning of
freedom and the beginning of the modern
yeah none of them are bad if it doesn't
happen to you but I think like putting
together what you said
for all this is why we have so much
pressure on boundaries and immigration
now because there are countries that are
being able to experiment with declining
populations but the world as a whole
there's osmotic pressure for populations
to migrate to to lower population
densities and so those experiments are
complicated by the movement of the whole
and and I think that that's a big code
to crack how are we going to deal with
that are we going to try to stratify
those movements are we going to try to
ameliorate them on a global scale I mean
what's your opinion about that that's
very interesting and a major problem
that we have just started to see the
very beginnings of now I mean most of
the migration today is not caused by at
least not directly caused by reaching
the limits of the ecosystem most of them
are caused by war right or civil war
internal conflict Syria being the
biggest example but the Congo being
another gigantic example South Sudan
being another one those are not yet
climate or Malthusian driven immigration
migrations those are side effect
conflict but by 2050 point six we're
gonna start to see assuming we don't
change our ways as much as we should or
need to you know massive migrations from
places like Bangladesh and where climate
change rising sea levels perhaps major
famines in parts of the world including
possibly China driven by climate change
that will be on a scale that makes these
current things look like you know
child's play and you know the decisions
that that societies take are going to be
very important you know on one side
humanitarianism says you know maybe we
should take in these folks on the other
side as we're learning more about what
makes society work there's a real danger
of producing decoherence in a society
we're seeing it in Western Europe quite
substantially today
and you know through a lesser but still
substantial degree in the US where
neo-fascist tendencies are arising in
reaction to the perceived decoherence of
society and that's something to take
seriously I believe so it's it's a damn
difficult problem and I don't know what
the aunt the right answer is but
fortunately we have a few years until it
becomes really significant we have this
preview driven by conflict to sharpen
our practices around yeah and as you say
even if the numbers aren't great the the
perception or the way people are
experiencing just this this amount of
migration is really quite exaggerated or
quite severe I don't know if it's
exaggerated or whether it's not I mean
depends what value you put on social
here it and I think there's a lot of
current thinking going on amongst
independent thinkers that social
coherence is more important than perhaps
we've been giving credit for the last 30
or 40 years and that it may argue for
smaller policies of higher coherence and
that Benton has to be overlaid on the
problem of environmental migration
that'll be facing us 30 or 40 years from
now because we have a big polity trying
to have coherence is difficult you know
I posted a video from mark live and he
sees that with some of the political
changes that are happening recently that
there is a hope that different nation
states will run different experiments so
that China has its own approach to some
of these looming crises that the US will
run its own experiment that that Europe
will run different types of experiments
and he sees this is very hopeful instead
of the whole globe running one type of
experiment to address these potential
crises or these looming threats and and
I was very encouraged by that
yeah that's great and then I regularly
be cowed against the idea of a world
government for just that reason I say
I'd be willing to consider a world
government when we have five worlds
right because we have
to have diversity and we have to have
the ability to compare different
approaches what we don't need is a world
government but what we do need is world
governance which is kind of interesting
right we need to manage the world as a
commons amongst a series of independent
entities whether they're nation-states
or smaller level and and people get
those two things confused way too often
people who see the need for governance
make the move to one world government
which to my mind is a likely
prescription for disaster for exactly
the reasons you just laid out which is
it produces a very large possibility of
making one bad decision rather than
experimenting with multiple multiple
ways that to solve these problems and
presumably the better ones then are
adopted by people as they're yeah makes
me think of one of these design
principles that comes from designing for
emergence this notion of maximal
decomposability so for example the human
body cannot be decomposed back to its
cells and then have it recompose itself
and so that but there are certain
generative ecosystems can be decomposed
into many many different types of
environment and still regenerate
themselves so for example my pond is a
beaver pond and slowly it silts up and
will become a meadow and then it'll
become a forest and then the beavers
will come back when there's enough food
for them and start destroying
quote-unquote the forest and then it'll
return into a beaver pond and so it can
be decomposed that the set of relations
can be decomposed over and over and it
can still recompose itself in so this
notion of distributed autonomous
organizations or Christopher Alexander's
notion of living centers is a design
principle based around not only having
Ecology's but that having the parts that
are in this ecology of the whole being
able to be decomposed back down to their
own autonomous
selves rather than having the part be
related to the whole such that no part
can recompose itself from its own self
so this is an interesting question how
how what is the maximum decomposable
part of human civilization we know it's
not an individual right so there's a low
limiting constraint there but we can ask
that for in relationship to a set of
principles so what is the maximally
decomposed unit that a human system has
to be to have this standard of living
and these freedoms let's say and build
around that kind of design so we're
designing for distributed systems but
that they need to be wholes unto
themselves yeah I think that Jordan
airily interesting and important and it
depends on whether these are open
systems that trade or whether they're
all targeted right
you know one of the phenomena of the
last 3040 years has been the very rapid
growth of international trade most
people don't know this but actually
international trade hit a very high
point before World War one 25 or 30
percent of the world's GDP was in
international trade it never recovered
from World War one and it didn't pass
the 30% mark again until the 80s now
it's quite a bit higher than that so we
have a world that it's very deeply
interconnected in ways that are both
economically efficient and very
dangerous from a systems collapse
perspective and so when you're asking at
what they Gail can there be a autonomous
group of humans if we assume they trade
with each other there can be quite small
right if we assume that they're autarkic
and they have to create the whole stack
and manage it themselves that it has to
be much larger so I would I would turn
that question around but I would also
say that my own preference is not to go
to autarky that is not been shown to
work that that it ends up with the world
of
North Korea right which has really smart
energetic people who have been
absolutely hobbled by a doctrine about
our the nice thing about it from a
coherent perspective if we assume trade
and interconnectedness to some level it
allows us to have higher coherence in
the units you know let's say that the
unit size that it let's say we can get
the unit size down to a hundred thousand
and as long as we allow trade and flows
we can I think almost certainly do that
at a hundred thousand we can probably
have a standard of pretty damn high
coherence particularly if we allow
encourage migration hey you don't fit in
this polity because of our agreed-upon
core values gonna move the one that
we're you do fit right I think that move
opens up releases a lot of pressures you
know if you have a continental class
Nate a nation-state the tendencies to
try to coerce those who disagree right
with the core values if your average
policy size is a hundred thousand and
then we could be very much like the
hunter-gatherers one of the things the
art anthropologists have found is that
the hunter-gatherers have a lot of
people leave one band and join another
because they disagree with the culture
or they get into a pissing match with
people and so you know having a smaller
autonomous unit that say in a hundred
thousand or less size that is viable
because of trade might well be the right
way to balance these two but it's you
know it's a question that we need to be
thinking about here as we try to figure
out what comes next
yeah so that reminds me of these other
principles of it'd be interesting if we
could come up with a design tool kit
that had this notion of universal access
so people could move around but each
autonomous organization would have some
kind of self-organized criticality so
that beyond a certain scale or
dependency it would have small crises
small collapses and stay robust so that
but that people could move in between
these domains a self-organized
all domains through universal access and
trade right so through actual movement
of people and also movement of goods and
services and financial instruments so
that's kind of interesting it made me
think about that
in terms of yeah that like that I like
that cuz again if we have let's say the
United States consisted of how many
would it be three thousand units of a
hundred thousand each right if a couple
of them went bust or I completely failed
so what right all the rest of them could
just absorb the refugees from those and
life goes on
nobody dies you know a few few hundred
thousand people have some disruption in
their life but the system is robust to
you know a sustained rate of failure
essentially and and of course there's
also a comparative competition some
policies will have better operating
systems than others and the word will
get out and people will migrate towards
the better ones and you know assuming we
concluded something like a hundred
thousand is an optimal size might some
of my discussions with Daniel shamaton
burger I've strongly suggested that we
build fission into the operating systems
right when a when a polity gets too big
it ought to decide to fission and
divided into two you know this is
something we know that hunter-gatherer
bands did as they started to exceed the
Dunbar number they fission in two to two
policies and I think that's you know a
very useful design principle to you know
you know keep front and center as we
think about you know designing this this
kind of more decentralized autonomous
world yeah and I think that that's a way
to have as you said much greater local
coherence amongst these hundred thousand
and have a less precarious situation and
again going back to the hunter-gatherer
model because when we know that work for
you know millions of years if we have
these polities they're not going to be
arbitrarily randomly selected they're
going to be related to each other it's
someone
right you know what let's use a word we
all we like you and I are both familiar
with game B right suppose there were a
game B set of policies right let's say
out of the three thousand American
polities thirty of them were game B
flavor right that it emerged out of a
original operating system and had
fissioned or had been developed
independently if one of those were to
die quote-unquote you know the refugees
could go to the other game B policies
that would be quite similar to their
always home or you'd even learn
something by its failure right so the
whole the whole would learn something
new okay that so that didn't work it was
not what we anticipated you know these
are all dynamics that cut against the
grain certainly of game a and
civilization building as we've known it
we've been on a long trajectory to
globalizing you know larger and larger
geo social spaces we have only a handful
of nations now we have one global
currency with the exception I guess of
North Korea used to be Libya too and
maybe Iran I'm not sure I mean this
whole movement is also in the ideology
and the mythology of let's say I tried
to get through this interview without
saying it but in the postmodern ideology
neoliberal ideology that everyone needs
to be one community and one global value
stream in one global experiment and that
we have to have these centralized global
interventions for these global problems
I mean what what do you see is the
reason why we have this ideology we
can't seem to get out of this ideology
of some kind of global you unification
yeah it's a damn damn problem because
unfortunately game a has defeated all
alternatives right it's and it's
defeated it in some pernicious ways and
in some good ways right it has raised
standards of living faster than
thing ever has right but it's also
invented psychologically informed
marketing for instance a part of this
growth has been in invented needs in
fact at this point in the advanced world
probably most of its invented needs
right you know who the hell wants or
needs processed food you know the crappy
 that they that they sell on the
shelves at grocery stores right you know
we don't that but somehow we've
been convinced that's good for us or
that it's status seeking or something
who the hell needs a hundred and twenty
five thousand dollar automobile nobody
right but through psychologically astute
marketing we've convinced lots of people
that they do and so a lot of this
so-called standard of living is bogus
and kind of endogenous the bad games
that game a plays on reprogramming our
you know our autonomous selves and
detrimental fashions and you know but
all that said and done it's beat all
comers so far and and so the challenge
that let's again let's be specific talk
about game be people we know are playing
trying to play game be and we're trying
to help them game be has got to be able
to beat game a at least in the microcosm
and I believe that tickly Daniel Martin
burger got some very good thing about
this Daniel a Jordan Hall as well and
some others is that it's may well be
that this unfair competition of game be
is in quality and true quality of life
I've really taken to the term I think
Jordan tends to use it more conviviality
you know we are basically apes with
clothes after all and we really want to
have a healthy life of the group you
know think about how many iriya
statistic the other day that more than
50% of the people and Manhattan will
live by themselves like what the hell
that's unnatural right humans that live
by themselves die both physically and
mentally and how many people I've read
somewhere that the average American has
less than four friends ago what the hell
that's sick
you know if he lived at a
our level band you know you'd have a
couple of dozen friends probably at
least a dozen and you'd have a fluid
convivial way of life that I would
expect people would find vastly more
attractive than this atomized program by
marketing dominated by scale accelerated
by Finance beasts called game a but we
also look at the history of these
utopian type movements and we know they
mostly fail they mostly don't work so
it's a real it's a really difficult
engineering problem here to create a
social operating system for a game a
that can operate at a small scale and
you know my conversations with Daniel
you and I both I think came away with a
sense that a scale of around 2500 yeah
might be a good place to start again
assuming open you know semipermeable
membranes trade interactions and frankly
to some degree parasitizing game a but
within the bubble within the membrane of
the game be first entity the quality of
life would be so much better from the
actual experiential perspective that we
actually have an osmotic pressure if
people wanting to come into game B and
relatively few people wanting to leave
game that would be that would be the
correct correct measure that we've
gotten the this operating system
approximately right though again I do
warn these operating system designers we
got to have complex systems humility
here you know the version 0.1 is going
to be wrong right and we better be
thinking about this as an experiment and
not as a doctrine if any of this stuff
becomes ideology or cults of personality
or rigid it's gonna fail like all these
other alternatives right it's got to
take a complex systems evolutionary
learn by doing perspective yeah and I
would hope that if we could have shared
anything today with the audience it's
about these these expelling experimental
attitude but also having curiosity
within
realm of ideas because I think that we
have paid a premium price on limiting
our ways in which we can ask questions
ways in which we conceive and model the
world by some ideological assumptions
that I would say have led to game a for
good and are now constrained by game a
and kind of constraining us as people so
I think that we kind of modeled an
exploration of ideas and perhaps we're
looking for both action to inform new
ways of thinking but also new ways of
thinking to come up with different
design principles for action and I think
that's what you and and friends of ours
are putting their effort into very well
said I think on that note we will end
here this has been wonderful I was
expecting this to be an interesting
conversation and I love the move that
you made to compare and contrast process
philosophy and complex systems thinking
and it's gonna make me go back and do
some research you know what I hope Jim
is that our audience will start filling
in the blanks for us so it's hopefully
it's provocative enough that that we get
some new ideas that we couldn't think of
ourselves like from young people
exactly production services and audio
editing by Dan media lab music by Tom
Mahler at modern space music calm
[Music]
[Music]