and relies on Oh Facebook in YouTube
welcome to fix our world Friday or we
hang out for an hour and by the end of
the hour we've fixed it every week so I
don't know what you all have a problem
with you guys keep breaking it every
Saturday the world breaks again and then
what is with that oh the world I like I
said I don't actually what we're talking
about today I think we're gonna talk
briefly about the Facebook group itself
and what we want it to focus on because
there was someone just posting there
there
yep blog posts which is her writing so I
I mean it's her project but like I get
that right now people under stress and
they're more prolific he will either
gonna like write more or weigh less
right like there's kind of only one cap
and so like maybe having one thread of
her posting good I can reach out to her
at the same time very few people are
posted in there and I feel like the more
people post the more permission it gives
people to post about their projects so
to some degree if it helps the algorithm
and if it like gets people more engaged
then I think we we allow it until it's a
problem I don't yeah that's that's why I
kind of wanted to bring it up I mean me
personally it's distracting because I
don't come to this location to to see
about that specific project to that
level detail or any specific project
level of detail that this is a space for
us working on projects together and I so
I don't know if we all posted every blog
post that we do to our projects to the
central feed that would be a bit
cumbersome now that being said I mean
she has posted every day since she
joined a group so is for okay with a
daily post that's unrelated to its over
about about a specific project and not
about overall projects and for those of
the reason you mentioned then that's
fine I kind of like the idea of people
doing like you know like we were doing
the monthly update videos almost doing
like maybe a weekly update post for
where you're at in your project but not
like every piece of content you create
right like I'm like hey I'm working on
you know this and that for
election not like hey here's a video I
just released it here's you know an
infographic I just made that should go
on the wiki election channel and then
what and then maybe once a week I say
hey I did this the other thing I think
these posts would fit better in game B
because they're about game B so wouldn't
you put that in the game B group rather
than the game B projects group I just
think it fits better there I don't think
she's posting there so I don't know why
I'd be here okay that's what's confusing
yeah so we can just see how it goes yeah
but I think it's distracting so I
thought I'd bring it out yeah I think it
would be good if she kept posting just
more of like a weekly like hey this I've
done seven blog posts or like some kind
of a wrap-up so that we're still hearing
from her and if people are interested
they should go and check it out but not
so that it's like yeah every time I've
gone to check the the like the projects
group it's been like five posts from her
that I have to scroll past to see what
other people are up to you so it is also
showing that no one else is posting
we're not even know seeing as much as
she is so like we agreed
we don't want I don't want every time I
go live to be on on that group page we
do these twice a week so those are
always live in the group and then those
are our contents and then we are Cerreta
Clee supposed to be posting previously
to ask people to come and participate
but I want to be having the discussion
of what does what do you guys want this
to look like right like and clearly we
don't want everyone posting daily
honestly I'd rather hear from quick
election or reasons or because in my
work they're more pertinent to world's
changing projects right at the same time
I do think everyone's individual
position in the world is their own
project it's like your opinion you're
writing here you're at all of those
things but having it be having a limit
on per project and then what do we want
weekly or monthly right do we want one
post with updates or do we want people
to just post their update when they want
two more maximum once a week for your
individual project I think it'd be great
if Anna has
to have her come on this could be Flint
the chat about it she's listening yeah
and especially if she considers that for
project we ever blog is something like a
project for sure yeah I'm sure she would
yeah but yeah yeah if she say that I
think so yeah cuz I mean it would be
cool to have some projects like to have
more of them to have them that weren't
tacked a hat like to have a nice a nice
mix yeah yeah cuz tech is definitely not
the end all be all right and so far
that's mostly what we have which make
sense but it would be good to do every
time I posted the URL to come join
underneath it so anyone who wants to
come and join online and talk about more
of the meta project about we'd support
all of our projects and the individuals
in game B as well which again for their
own individual project and I guess this
is like good circle nothing I was gonna
say I finally did do a weekly update oh
yeah I saw that it wasn't a video but it
was just you know I had I was posting
something on social media and I thought
okay well let's uh share it here as well
I didn't look at it I saw that it was to
do with quito is that just because
that's something that you're focusing on
for doing reason about yeah that's the
first topic is that because I think it's
a small enough topic that it's doable
but big enough that it's not like just a
fact-checking website so I think kind of
fits there plus it's something I do have
people argue about is intimately
familiar with the space so it's a good
place to start ya know I think that is
when I first thought that it was like
really right now people do not need to
be going Quito like it's like we might
be all be living off of grain and in six
months to a year because we're just like
need calories to get through Quito is
always like it might be perfect for your
health
yeah but not for the world that it's
like that but that is exactly why it's
something we need to know minds it on as
vegans don't get to decide what's true
right there's like your body in the
world and they're different yeah they're
although there is a lot of
summer sausage at my grocery stores just
say that if you want to survive the
apocalypse summer sausage is great
because it doesn't have to be
refrigerated I don't even know what
summer sausage is like it's just a lot
it's just the sausage that has enough
salt and fat that it doesn't go bad
bleed disappeared again she rented
starting a sausage should be in and out
where is it oh yeah I could talk about
it all day so don't get me started but
yeah that's funny one of the reasons I
haven't tried you know is the community
that I'm part of I like participating in
it and I can't really participate if I
go keto but I'm like actually although
this is the worst time for the planet
maybe for me to do it I have like a
month why not I guess I could I could
try to go you know well in probably
maybe it'd be better to go to say low
carb rather than because you could
actually you can do keto as a vegetarian
and you can do though carb is a
vegetarian it's just easier if you're
not but it's definitely doable so those
two aren't opposites but that's good
how's wiki election going hey draw to be
done in West yeah I've been working on
the content for the news topics in doing
my livestream tomorrow was supposed to
be last week but I decided to actually
properly set up like a cadence so it's
on the weeks I'm not doing it I actually
properly scheduled it and do it a full
week ahead of time announce the topic
and then the thing that I didn't do that
I wanted to do which I'll probably just
do at some point today is like paying on
the the Facebook page and possibly just
as me asking for guests has that one
with where that word was hands down the
best session I've done so far like
actually having someone else there to
talk to and to ask you know they can ask
questions and be like oh well what do
you mean by that and quick quick
valuable so maybe one of the things that
we can post on our Facebook group is
like yer ways we can help each other
right now right which is hey let's be
guests on each other shows to get the
word out for you no I mean you don't
need to be a political expert just have
an opinion you come Joanne Wickie
lecture and it's better the less you
know about it
and so that end as well as project
raising because you don't necessarily
need us to raise your project if you
consider time and there's enough of us
you can show up then host a hosted
project raising for yourself and have a
bunch of people right so if you have one
person it's more of an interview and if
you have multiple people you can do a
project crazy and say hey this is some
Facebook groups do have a regular post
of a certain type and so that might be a
good one is that was actually asks an
offer so absolutely yeah it's
interesting terms so maybe like asks and
offers or something like that
and just have that be a weekly post that
that goes out every week and people can
comment on it like that
yeah and then that's like kind of just a
a much simpler like Oh a one-off as
opposed to like that my project needs
help it with these things this is just
like hey who wants to co-host a
livestream that probably wouldn't go on
helpless because it's not a position
it's just like you're the quick thing
what yeah I mean I think that would be a
perfect place to put it I mean it's good
either way to post it in the group as a
thing but also I think it helps to put
that post specifically asking for it
every week to remind people right
because we often forget to ask Oh y'all
can help me with this like I was you
know I was posting my social media post
to try and get some feedback and I
didn't even it took me a while before I
even thought about letting this group
know right I think having wanna say it
like whoever has something that is a
live show it's like you want
participants to be on camera with you
you can also participate just knowing
when people are doing this you can show
up if you want to write and support that
and then of course the project crazies
are more concentrated focused on we're
here to support you
for the next hour and doing that I like
the the asks and offers because even if
no one posts if it's something they know
is there regularly they know that's kind
of where to or to look for it
that's what yeah on that kind of idea
one of the things for my project I've
been thinking about doing a live debate
using the tool and even have it be kind
of like a competition because it has a
scoring system which is very game a
hopefully I mean like I'm not into
sports but I'd be into that and read the
debates that and and yeah yeah yeah I
keep struggling because I keep kind of
wandering into the game a process there
was one post I guess it was last month
or something and someone and I was like
oh yeah and you could do a competition
people were like yeah that's kind of
very game and I'm like oh yeah you can
do it you can do that I get the same
idea certainly what it worked maybe even
better not as a competition but just as
a gallery of what people I think it was
that the guy who had the kind of the
wood furniture that would connect
together and stuff like that with the
plastic bottles I can't ruin the name of
that project I keep trying to say cube
spawn but it was before that yeah he was
gonna do a kind of a design thing where
he'd post and people could show their
designs I said hey yeah and then you
could show the one that was best and I'm
like after it's like no you just kind of
you know you say oh here's some that I
picked out to show or here's a gallery
of all of them or most of them or all of
them actually because I think it's
helpful for people to see oh this one
then come out really well but the
person's trying and that gives you
permission you don't have to be perfect
right so yeah I've just been really
feeling my game a challenge just since
then I do you think it's important to
like to make sure that while you're
striving towards game B things certain
things just because it's gave me doesn't
mean you throw it out like competition
is fine within reason and as long as
your life's not on the line like there's
certain things you're like maybe it's
not that bad and maybe yeah how could we
optimize it maybe we don't want to just
say good and bad maybe there's different
scales you're like
well this one is good but but it's hard
and expensive and these ones aren't as
good but they're cheap and they're easy
to do so it's like oh there's multiple
streams that you can be the best in and
that people can try out and figure out
what that means to them but I think
there is still like a some sort of a
scoring a competition or a way to like
to rank it because if there's a thousand
how else do you find which ones the
community says are worth trying and like
oh this one works great for me I built
something and it's you know it took $2
in an hour and I'm still using it six
six months later cool my brain is not
arrived yet to the tiffin anything
anything last week I just gotten back to
Vancouver and was on I think I cleaned
all day that day and then came out and
had the meeting it's here on Saturday
and then I fell apart haven't really on
Friday I did one on Saturday and I was
like I can't do these at 6 o'clock at
night my brain doesn't work in the
evening I can't not smoke pot during the
day it was like I just and so I've been
processing for the last week on like why
why am i falling apart except what the
world way to the world on my shoulders
as always as the case itself 19 when I
in no way have any solutions for that in
and of itself but I've been doing live
the last Davis stay 3 from 8:30 to 9:30
in the morning instead and Nick has come
on both times just popped in for 15
minutes yesterday at the end and then a
few minutes today before you take a
phone call and he had suggested posting
the link and I'm not doing on Facebook
but on on Twitter under my comments as
well as in the description so people can
join and it was like we'll try we'll see
how that how that works
what I really want is basically this the
first solution raising specifically like
I want either host solution raisings
live online where we were you know I say
food and then when we have enough
audience if there's you know five or six
people who want to be on we just host it
for that time period or potentially
having it be a more of a board meeting
on what we actually do for solution
raising it's like how do we actually
move it forward ahead of conversation
yesterday with Jordan
and he was mentioning like finding I
don't agree with a lot of necessary with
90% always what he says no he's got 10%
where we differ he's like like and I
agree that there's people different
people who do the brainstorming than do
the work but I don't think one is
necessarily better than the other is
just having a process to work through so
solution raising is kind of the first
part of that solution is brainstorming
and then how do you actually move on so
I want to be having the men a
conversation on how do we have to do a
solution raising on solution raising and
I had one scheduled for yesterday about
no one I didn't even go on to see if
anyone showed up because I didn't like
no one artist EP I was like I'm not in
the space after two conversations the
live one in Jordan and but that's what
I'm just kind of allowing it to evolve
maybe not putting all the pressure on it
like this has to solve things right now
but finding that's my dream is to find
people who want to have that meta
conversation every day for an hour I
mean if you're at home why not but more
finding someone who can put the notes
together so you don't need to attend
everyone but we're still somewhat moving
it moving it forward showcasing what we
could do with 10,000 people and $100,000
Jordan suggestion was to work it out
with a thousand people and then have
everyone invite ten which I was like yes
of course but that's it's not like we
get 10,000 right now it's like we're
working it out with three to five people
but having more of an audience and then
growing like moving over to zoom saying
okay here's how we're gonna showcase
what a solution Traci looks like then
we'll gain people who want to have the
more meta conversation on solution
raising and then move over to zoom and
just host that that conversation online
but I can't control that that's what
it's going to look like all I can do is
show up for that hour and see who comes
and see what comes up and see see if the
world is ready for whatever I can offer
during that during that time period yeah
I think it's good I think it's a good
plan yeah I haven't been able to even
keep up with watching everything you're
doing so unless I know it must be hard
to do it we're just like it's all I can
do like I can't edit so like live ones
are perfect which is what I was gonna go
live and if we evening and you three
Monday Wednesday Friday like a
five-minute video it's like screw all of
that
show up to the my live conversations I
have scheduled and then do a live hour
and that's it and then when I feel the
need I have a message I want to give out
so I always do then then I'll do it and
I and I do that this may not be the
forum but I did have some thoughts on
your one about when you started off the
video about the correspondence between
you and that other person I've gotten
through that one the the one with Jordan
is on his and still in my list to watch
yeah yeah I would have way more highly
suggest that one than the one but was
just so like it was it was actually like
humor that I had to like the self or my
body it was like is this happening in
the game be space he got kicked out
while I was on that conversation the
admins were talking that I wasn't part
of and the guy got kicked out would that
be one yesterday of the day before
yesterday yeah the guy that was just a
misogynistic like you can't have agency
because you're a woman I was like well
what are you doing in the world he was
like just have patience with you count
I'm like I was expecting more from a
fully grown man with foliages he
actually was on it too well I got kicked
off because I was trying to save that
picture somebody put at the end which I
was like that's brilliant yeah yeah the
pan is 19% so good oh really cuz that's
I think Peter Isaac who did it so you
can probably just contact us that's a
good idea because sometimes I am I have
read some posts in game B and I haven't
actually been to the main page for a
while and it just seemed like it was
buzzword bingo and I've been trying to I
was trying to think of a way what's a
constructive way to do some sense making
or to follow the Omega roll and I could
not figure it out so I just didn't
engage but I've been thinking about it
ever since then it's like I don't know
you mean like what kind of rules or what
sort of like system is in place that
he'll even pretend even that just the
conversation with that person like right
there saying something and it seems to
me that one of two things either they're
trying really hard to express themselves
and they're just not doing a good what I
think is a good job or the way that I
could perceive
let me put it in in that format or
they're trolling now it's probably a
50/50 chance based on what I see because
it really looks like they went to one of
the random conversation generators like
there's ones for like your here's your
business plan and they just write a
whole bunch of buzzwords together and it
literally looks like that's what they
did like I could almost tell them which
website they went to but it's like but
there's enough like campy terminology in
there that maybe they just when I was
young I used a lot of extra-large words
for no reason except to look smart it
took me years to get off of that now I
try for a very very simple language and
sometimes too simple so I'm just
wondering are they going through that
and stuff like that but I I've been so
I've seen those in the past in the game
be spaced and I've just been kind of
stepping over them for now because I
don't think I can provide them or any
viewers any vikon I figure out how to
provide value in that situation yeah and
it's hard I mean that's kind of why I'm
not one of those people I don't know why
I got made a moderator I was like I said
like Janelle shows up and calms the
situation down I just ignore the
situation I'm like I can't handle a bye
I mean there was the time last week or I
was still in Alberta word someone posted
the weird video lights and I was like
you can't do this like you can't have a
watch party with it's like what we can't
make sense of things unless we're gonna
post them and then make sense of them
together I'm like not in this climate no
anti just smoked a joint when I was
dealing with this there was a little
more paranoia but I was like this isn't
okay like you can't post weird stuff
going on over Jerusalem and be like what
is this with this eerie music it's not
the platform for it like if there was
one where you can discuss it and figure
it out cool but let's be honest that's
not what it was for it was just the I
can't even say fear-mongering but like
weird mongering just like what is this
who knows weird mongering have a new
term there I like that yeah yeah I think
that yeah and I'm trying to express that
it's it's kind of like we just you know
if you want to
go for a topic that's fine but find some
the highest quality media about it you
can don't bring the lowest thing and say
let's make sense about that there's a
million things in this award we've got
to make sense of let's not start with
the lowest quality stuff and work our
way up
let's do the other way we're like in the
middle to have a system that you're
recommending to be like hey this isn't
the best space for it but there's no
good space let's you know try to work
through this whatever this video is with
this system but it sounded like that
wasn't it it was just posting a video
and being like what do you think yeah
sure okay yeah it's it's most of the
time when people do that and of course
this is me reading and to the you know
projecting onto that person but you
that's something you believe and you
don't want to tell people you believe it
because you don't know your response but
you're posting it or are you just trying
to whip people into a friends they want
those two things that's typically what
that is I'm not saying that individual
was doing yeah no that's a question that
I've been having lately there's somebody
that's on my facebook who host I'm like
okay I think I know what they believe
but then it really just seems like they
post everything they see like a quarter
of the stuff that she posts is like you
know cove 819 is baked in this and that
and then like half of it is like koba 19
is serious and people are dying and
governments are taking it seriously like
so really you're not like it's not like
you have a viewpoint that you're posting
from you're just posting everything you
see with this talking about anything
this is what I was gonna ask before I
know this but I buy it because of my
brain and I can't read anymore and
there's like this common this common
thing that happens if you like just read
this book I'm like yeah I get that that
that didn't used to cost me something
now I can read one book a month and I
have to have about 15 apps full hungry
yeah so no I'm not taking reading
assignments from anyone even myself so
but like that's because of my brain but
there's also that like why are we why
are we giving reading assignments to
each other why do I need you to learn
what I know if I can't disseminate it to
you it's different to me when it's like
one of the
bigger like gym rat or Jordan Hall and
it's or Daniels Proctor burger and it's
pertaining to like game B it's like oh
everyone should watch this because I get
it but like no I'm not like that guy who
was having the conversation with and it
was like oh is this your project like
what would integrity looks like he's
like well reading this stuff before
having a conversation I'm gonna read an
entire website worth of information
before I can comment like no you didn't
post any content until that that comment
yeah there's nothing to review until
like almost the end of the conversation
so I think he was like absolutely said
there's two options I read that one like
this guy's totally it's wrong which was
partially just based on his picture yeah
that's the troll picture 100% you know
been there for five months like wait uh
hello and there are people in this space
who have shown up do we know make a rule
all along and now they're having a hard
time and I think it's very different to
show up consistently in a powerful or
whatever way a good way and then you're
losing your right now and I think
collectively we're losing our shirt
right now so it's it's more I mean for
talking to Jordan yesterday I don't
think anyone else who hadn't talked to
him before would look at that video and
think he's he's got somatic energy or
that like nuts
I think that's Jordan manic like that's
Jordan stressed out and it's like very
different than his presence six months
ago and I think he's doing great I think
that he you know I mean like as much as
any of us can do and I'm glad to hear
that but it's like we're all having a
hard time right now no matter how much
sense you can make and how connected you
are to other people this is a weird time
for life to be happening right now and
so like I always come off wishy-washy
and all over the place so it's not
different for me but he's like so
present with you and can like talk to
anyone and gives you like all this time
and it was just a different a different
energy that from Jordan was like okay I
can see there's a little bit of a change
here and even even acknowledged it
during them sorry not to that extent but
just like yeah interesting times but
this is what is going on I think a lot
of us are not aware of
how much it's affecting us it seems like
it really kind of digs in and and it's
not till like after I was I was snipping
at my wife today of course we've been in
the same house together 24/7 for a week
and a half now and we probably have
another month now all they extended
everything Wow month and a half they
extended everything in Dallas till May
something we're not technically in
Dallas but you know so May 20th so yeah
this is gonna be a good test for our
relationship we should be fun yeah I
know and I think that for everyone even
my family like our household we're
always home almost all the time but like
my dad's will go out for a walk and go
and do things it's like I need to go do
something I'm like go for a walk you
can't go do something like you can't
like I'll just go to the bank no let's
go get blood work done no just a walk I
feel we're just going for a walk
I get it feel weird go for a walk but
it's like even me my kid or home
together all the time the fact she
doesn't get to go to school in fact we
don't have cohousing the fact that like
there's none of these other outlets is
like oh my kid is going stir-crazy
in a way she hadn't before inch and I
can only imagine the kids that are out
all day every day and this is now that
drastic for her it's not that drastic of
a change but it's still a big change and
yeah snapping at each other and like my
dad stopped at me a few times more so
than he has at all and I'm like oh yeah
cuz he's going stir-crazy because he
can't leave and you can't like do the
things and it's like you not do that
here like good who's this and I'm like
okay I can try to stay in my room but
this isn't the Wi-Fi which is why we
easy it's Wi-Fi or so than mine because
that was one of the other reasons going
live at 6:00 p.m. the second time I did
like we want to listen but we can't
understand it's cutting out all the
words so way our nesto said something do
we want a response this who's been like
15-20 minutes ago how do you know an
Android development studio yes but I
guess just the last half is the more
important things he wants to look into
making it an app for decentralized
census in Cuba I mean that sounds may be
like either a solution raising our
project raising depending how far along
it is I would say probably solution
raising and step
and go from there now I'm doing a
solution raising arrest or if you want
to do it on voice and on video because I
know you don't like doing video we can
do a project raising on it no that's not
us I can make it make a comment of my
own personal opinion on that is I would
especially if you're just doing a test
app I wouldn't do android development
studio I would do one of the web
technologies because then you just
deployed and - - Android and Apple and
the web in one development it'll catch a
development in a third until you know
the project works and then you can
create more specific things that's
that's one of my general rules now if
you know the Android technology well
which I can't remember
is it Java then that's a good reason to
go for it but our recommendation in
general is to use our cross-platform
tech and see if you want more info on
that I'm happy down a little bit of
project raising right there I'm not a
developer but I would agree never said
anything you said but I agree I trust
you guys know that just out of
politeness
yeah is that just a vote yes I disagree
spend a lot of time doing each one
individually that you're how fun is just
all in its a buddy I do have the like
oppositional defiance disorder or
flutter flutter that's good awesome of
like not listening to our higher-ups
questioning everything and I'm like you
don't need to stop questioning but you
do need to stay at home like we can have
a revolution from our living room you
can't pour out into the streets and it
is really like I the next few weeks are
gonna be very very very interesting
because as people in North America go
stir-crazy and our mental health and
emotional health is put into toll even
if our numbers aren't going up well the
numbers aren't going if they're go up
catastrophic if they don't go up
catastrophic cuz it's like well why are
we even doing this and that well we
watch the rest of the world implode
because this is hitting
in India and all these places that don't
have the capacity to deal with it like
Canada and Australia can don't have the
health care systems like it's like the
worst of all worlds instead of like
Camden America where we have more of the
power at a right point if that was just
depress everyone this is interesting but
like just somewhat ignore that well
working on other things I sound really
good post I think it was that's
important this morning I don't know the
exact wording but was sort of saying
like not all the things that you're
hearing or are mutually exclusive like
you the you know you can say that he
farts is dangerous and you can say that
excessive unemployment is dangerous and
you can say that you know authoritarian
overages andrás those can all be
dangerous that was what I was like
realizing with my kid I've raised her to
not in any way respect authority ie
myself and it's okay because I'm like
you're your own person but now we're out
and I'm snapping I'm like stop touching
your face she's like stop touching I'm
like you need to listen and also like
I'm going through the same thing with my
government right or it's like any other
time I'm not gonna listen right now
you're the best we have we have to
listen even if I can also spell like
it's like that parallel of like you
can't do this like any other time be
goofy you know test Authority but like
right now life or death you need to
listen to me and not life or death for
her or she'll be fine I'll probably be
fine and the person who won't be fine is
not taken seriously the two of us but
like it's still making sure that it's
not on us when I tell you not in your
mouth don't put things right now yeah I
really liked your point Jubilee let's we
can question authority but let's follow
it
until you know if in a high-risk
situation let's follow the authority and
have all the questioning and then you
know if we if we can prove that they're
wrong then let's do something else
that's that's really I hadn't thought
about expressing it that way that's good
and I think to extend that it's also
still keep an eye out for potential
government overreach because 100 percent
you can see a bunch of governments are
like oh yeah
now's the time and so it's being ready
to be like hey I know you states had to
stay inside but no you can't do that and
that's a really hard thing to balance
because like usually we'd go outside and
protest but now it's like what do you do
in this case you're not supposed to go
outside and they're doing stuff you
don't like probably be watching
Democracy Now and yeah though it's who's
gonna try every different culture and
every different country and and we
haven't even seen the start of its baby
what's just scary and at the same time
we were watching the like collapse of
like I was listening to Democracy Now
what they were talking about orphan
drugs and how Gilead has one of the
treatments that can can help with kovat
19 it's one of the most promising ones
but they wanted they registered it as an
orphan drug because it's people who have
under two hundred thousand cases so they
the patent doesn't expire right so that
you can keep its profitable to still
come up with those drugs but but they
knew this wasn't gonna be under 200,000
so like the rules that were in place are
very different and I'm like good luck
enforcing that you realize Gilead you're
gonna try to keep your intellectual
property and if you do that you're gonna
destroy all intellectual property
because the truth is Canada Australia
India China aren't gonna listen to the
international patents when it costs
people lives and if we're not gonna do
it then why are we doing it for insulin
or insulin is actually non orphan drugs
like the Bo is open but like you know
AIDS medication and everything else I
wouldn't do it no patents are broken and
it's the same look like people rebelling
against the government they're like do
what I want and like you're literally
the ones giving them the permission to
get the military involved yeah everyone
stayed inside and like we're very lucky
here it's a very different world than
anybody or people gave beat up because
they go outside and they don't have the
option and they don't have they're not
surrounded by neighbors so we're trying
to help them and willing to get
groceries for them like we still have to
go through all of that other turmoil of
emotional people and needing to stay at
home and doing that but stay at home
like it's it's not hard and it's really
hard and I think that message to that
it's we've um been flippant about it
like the last year
now to fight wars and we just have to
sit at home watch Netflix I'm like I
don't understand understand how hard it
is to sit at home and watch Netflix for
weeks and weeks on end people don't like
not not having a purpose know about war
there's a purpose in erican there it's a
very different thing for sure going to
war and being quarantined but like also
hard in very different ways and I mean I
don't think people are going to get PTSD
from being quarantined but that doesn't
mean that it's pleasant and that doesn't
mean like there's not other things that
a certain medical staff are already
there oh yeah okay true yeah like people
don't go into nursing thinking they're
gonna get PTSD out of it there's very
specific if you go to nurse on the
frontlines of course you do this is big
and like even now where it's the numbers
aren't very big in New York yet although
I'm sure they don't agree with that and
those kind of things it's yeah and PTSD
may not be technically correct term but
there's a lot of jobs and I think the
majority of jobs they - tend to burn
people out yeah and at the pace of in
the requirements of work especially like
the startup space where I've been I mean
I burned out and I crashed and mine
wasn't even as high-stakes Asst there's
all this other stuff and then yeah you
you just think of doctors and yeah
nurses even before this this thing it
was a high-pressure job that I guess or
a lot of that I'm trying to think of
what was the there was some that are
high turnover I camera what the job was
right now but but yeah you can imagine
under this environment and that's if
they're staying healthy yeah I hope that
when I'm saying no PTSD I mean for like
just regular civilians like yeah yeah
anybody like even now being a a grocery
worker why would one even that like I
know a lot of my PTSD because it's not
like there was one event I medical PTSD
which this is not unhealthy and but at
least the rest of the worlds like do we
trust to be not trust I don't know we're
getting different different information
from different people exactly okay you
mentioned insulin and I just did
but no and I just looked it up to
confirm it is not open but I don't
understand why especially since the
first available day was community like
the applicator that's still patented
that that's my understanding is the drug
itself is open but like the EpiPen is
the thing is patented I think well okay
I mean there is yeah well yeah the words
are the ones that encourage the
authorities to overreact or give the
authorities an excuse depending on what
you think the motivation of the
authorities are I think most of our
authorities especially in the US and
Canada have all positive intents they're
just not very good governments have
spent the last 10 years like selling
their their trust wholesale like just
anything and so now those same
governments or like hey you have to
trust us now we're all like no that
you guys are losers like you guys like
on stantly here's a thousand videos at
that person lying why should I trust you
now and then you've got the ax like
extra stuff on top of it of some
governments are using this to do
overreach and like there's examples of
it and so now there's sort of is a
reason but it's like yeah but if you're
wrong that kills people so it's trying
to find that balance and it's really
hard was funny watching the Italian
government officials literally cuss at
in the video where they have two or
three Clips like stay though F home you
see the one of the V mayor going up like
screaming people in person yeah and I
they had the translator but yeah he was
like yeah go inside and the mayor like
and you could tell like he was trying to
just get people to do it like he was
going up there in person doing it
because it was important and then the
other guy who threatened like stay
inside or will send cops with
flamethrowers yeah this or that we don't
do anything in between in Italy pores or
imp like requests yeah which that one I
think was excessive Duterte I do not
think was like exaggerating no no well
yeah I mean he just wants reasons to
shoot people
so basically quite a few retail workers
you've had two or three dollar raises
per hour per company there's I think it
should probably be mandated like hey
these things maybe we can give them
minimum 15 or whatever that looks like
okay straight job is important even
though we spent the last twenty years
saying it's not whoops are bad let's pay
them properly no the counter that is
that Allah those retail businesses are
now going out of business and that will
increase the number they go out of
business but that's a debatable case
what it's based on the kind of retail I
think right like if you sell candles
okay that's not I mean you probably
shouldn't be open during this if you're
a grocery store okay yeah maybe yeah
right yeah no that's good I didn't think
of it that way so yeah the the people
that are yeah some hazard pay for the
people that are that are what's the
what's the term for the service
essential weapon essentially yeah well
that's like right now we're seeing what
is truly essential what we cannot like
and you're also seeing in other
countries where they like Indian done
you keep this food stores open and so
they have a very different they have
population of like sixty percent of
their populations below their poverty
line and literally does it live paycheck
to paycheck they live day to day right
you work that day to buy your groceries
to eat that day so you can possibly work
the next day there's no option to stay
home for two to three weeks if you're
not feeding people so they're trying to
figure that out and it's like start are
you gonna starve you're gonna go through
streets and get shot I mean what do you
do and it's gonna be very very testing
but in our countries in America in
Canada you have all of these people
working from home who think like they're
they're the new wealthy really because
if you it's everyone else has lost their
job and you actually have a paycheck
you're doing okay at the same time we're
also showcasing that your job can be
done from home which means it can be
done from the Philippines and
China and India and so those jobs unless
your work really does truly want it to
stay in your country because the type of
business it is or the type of business
owners they are it's gonna cause like
the 2008 financial crisis was a bubble
that burst that caused people to lose
their homes not their jobs but the
ripple effect caused people to lose
their jobs this is right now no jobs all
of the secondary tertiary whatever down
the line jobs that aren't done like so
knows you know they have an online
t-shirt company and they're still
shipping out and they're like what we
can't get t-shirts in like it's like
even if you could stay open because you
figured out how to do it in the
quarantine you can't get the supplies
and then it's like this is huge and we
need to be figuring it out for even if
you have a job right now things are
gonna change in six months to a year so
how to create an economy how do we
create a world where your how to get
food and the goods you need to survive
isn't tied to your employment and we
can't leave that up to our governments
cuz their only option is ubi and they
that just causes massive inflation and
that's not hyperinflation right now is a
whole other level on top of but it's
gonna be happening yeah I didn't realize
I heard the other day that in the 2008
crisis the the credit markets froze up
so businesses couldn't handle their
cashflow appropriately and and it was
exposed how bad that was for a lot of
that you think oh well they can't get a
loan so much but really their day-to-day
the only way they can keep their
finances flowing as is through small
micro loans repaid sigh even between
banks but that and that's happening now
and I didn't realize that just like last
week the markets were they weren't
completely frozen but they were pretty
badly halted yeah and that's probably
like a ground-up halting as opposed to
the 2008 it was them halting it because
they were the ones in trouble but now
they're not having the money coming in
like people aren't paying rent I heard
that fifty percent of people I'm not
sure if it was California or the u.s.
didn't pay their rent on April 1st
8% over 50% yeah you think about yeah
record number of people in the u.s.
applied for first time unemployment 6.6
million in a week yeah which is helpful
if you know what it was before if you
see the graph yeah the track like you've
never seen like almost a flatline boop
boop boop and then like maxes out what
yeah it's bigger than the depression
that being said during the Depression
people didn't have unemployment and so
they weren't necessarily putting it in
there and this doesn't account for of
course all of the undocumented workers
all of these black market workers always
like Ernesto's comment about the fact
that the u.s. employs illegal immigrants
to help you know produce food
those people have zero protection plus I
mean you know all the other immigration
concerns going on there in general like
that's a pretty at-risk watching now the
interesting thing I think with either
today or yesterday Trump head like is
trying to prevent 3m from shipping the
the good masks the five and or five and
95 and in fact you know if I have you
trying to like stop 3m from like
shipping those to any other country and
basically you're trying to say no these
are all ours you can't ship heads like
he's trying to stop them from shipping
them to Canada it's kind of a place in
order and he's like no those are ours
which is interesting you think about I
mean a that's just not good for
relations but be really shows like oh so
we shouldn't rely on you as a supply
chain and now there's gonna be like new
businesses popping up new competition
like with the company that sued the
people or threatened to sue the people
that we're making those valves so what's
happened over the last two weeks
so many alternatives to ventilators
people creating new ones people learning
how to fabricate like the actual machine
themselves congratulations that lawsuit
may have just put you out of business or
at least that that line like whisper of
a lawsuit that you might get employer in
the future great we know that that's a a
limit now we're gonna come up with
alternatives you cut off this these
supply of n95 masks now all of a sudden
it's okay so what are options that
options gone so we have to
we have to do it now we have to do it
quick and the whole necessity is the
mother of invention we're learning that
now big time and that's how you can put
industries now like after this Canada
we're gonna seriously consider you know
having a bunch of alternatives and not
using the US for a bunch of our supply
chains because we've learned what that
looks like and the truth is every
country is gonna be doing that because
cuz like they got in trouble for having
shipped out things in genuine like you
should have known you should have kept
them here well that's not the world we
live in right like what do we do right
now like I don't know if Canada makes
enough food for our population I
actually don't think we do I know we
export a lot of it but we also import a
lot of food what is the net I don't know
and it's not necessarily per calorie
like I don't know if I want to live off
of cranberries and wheat like no but we
will we're lucky and that we absolutely
have enough land to do it so like if we
have to spool up it work but for us and
the US it's possible for place I don't
know yeah can you grow oranges up that
far no no well you you could build a big
enough green house maybe for a tree I
don't know one orange I mean it could
end up being like a bunch of hot houses
because at this point it's more about
trying to get food out and Canada's has
a bunch of open land that we can like
alright let's throw out some greenhouses
and but definitely I'll just what right
now we should be 3d farming like that
should be what the population who's
stuck at home is like figuring this
stuff out I get it we need a few weeks
to chill and like more in our world how
it was but like now we need to be like
alright well we need to think six months
to a year down the road scientists and
doctors have this to some degree we need
to be dealing with what this is at least
by what I want to be doing is like what
would we've wanted in place for this if
we had known it was coming a year ago
then let's get those things in place for
the next thing that's coming and this
thing in a year when yeah it will happen
again in five to ten years yeah it may
be totally different
but anything but even just a pandemic I
mean we've had one I mean not a
full-blown pandemic but we've had a new
disease every five or ten years so it's
just on you know how often is
to be something with a high enough in
fact all right that's good I mean like
you think this could end up being you
know similar in scale to like in five
years if we don't take climate change
seriously if there's you know a bunch of
states permanently on fire in a couple
states and all of a sudden okay we have
less places to grow food those people
have to go into the other areas we're
now having a very different but similar
in scale like oh we have to rework how
everything works now mm-hmm
yeah and I think or nestos point there
are a lot of countries and individuals
their businesses will start thinking
about supply chains and keeping things
internal which will be a bit of a d EE
it'll also be a resiliency which we've
had right passions yeah I mean it might
end up that sounds like that part is
definitely for the best yeah and that's
where it's like now as just as a planet
we're like oh maybe it's not you know
super thin so it's like fragile supply
lines that were just trying to shave
every cent off but you know a pebble can
topple the whole thing like okay maybe
we need to have a little bit more
resiliency if it costs us a bit more I
see all that all those possibilities for
capitalism to be dismantled cuz it's
like to this point we've shaved off
every penny for the profit of a very
select few which gave us a brand of
efficiency but not really like a
monopoly gives you efficiency but they
don't pass that on consumers whereas us
owning something together which is kind
of what our government Stern's doing
with the factories they don't own them
but they're like you need to make these
things and that businesses themselves
are taking it on themselves to be like
how can I be of service I need to break
even that's all I care about right now
this is different and there'll be people
who want to go back to the old way now
right great now I can make a profit but
the truth is is like if we can find out
how much how much does Canada need and
can we make it ourselves and how can we
make the supply meet the demands and how
can we do that as efficiently as
possible and have redundancy built into
it where you don't have four very
important things one factory in the
world making them you have a factory in
every country at least and then at that
point everyone was making n65 right
masks and I support whatever said then
we wouldn't be shipping to each other
right once you have the
abundance then it's like Oh yours burnt
down yours is an operating yeah of
course everyone can give five percent of
theirs to India right but like when
there's one country's expected to supply
to all the world and they're like well
which who do you want us to supply to
everyone's in need right now yeah these
are lives everywhere
ya know Marik you guys aren't more
important yeah we we have been able to
adapt pretty quickly like a lot of the
fashion houses they're making the cloth
mass not the n95 but the cloth mass
first of all though leave more in 95
mass for the people that need it because
people will be buying them and then plus
it also will help with transmission
because earlier they were saying don't
wear a mask but now they're gonna start
saying wear a mask and they said don't
because we need to save them they said
they I wish they hadn't have said oh
it's not gonna help you anyways
well it's not gonna help you but it's
gonna help other people it would have
been better if we did all have masks
yeah and now we're finding that out so
now people aren't gonna trust them as
well because they're now going back on a
180 as opposed to like it's a complex
topic it's it's not gonna help you not
get affected but it's going to help you
not understand others yeah slow down
this part that is super important but
that's not why people were buying them
they weren't buying to be like oh man
let's talk about masks so I don't infect
other people that was not for us and
then if everyone like what you actually
want to protect yourself as all your
neighbors so like make them for
everybody else and not yourself but like
out the whole point is if everyone was
very and that would be better off but I
there is a someone posted something
called this is like shore dangers virus
because we all simultaneously oh yeah I
saw that
yeah I saw that we're acting like we all
have the virus
and so to not straight up and also
acting like we don't have the virus to
like we don't have the antibodies we're
susceptible to it and that whole thing
get my kid hurt her foot I feel very bad
but as soon as I like to knowledge that
she like went from walk normally to like
full-on like like let me know if you
need an ice pack and I'll get you one
yeah we have about seven minutes
but I don't know this is just be kind of
complaining but it's funny because I've
had a couple people potentially come
over to my house to do work and I'm like
oh are you gonna wear a mask and goes
well legally we're allowed to come in
because I'm like what's my question that
was that was actually the opposite of my
question if I'm saying are you gonna
wear a mask when you come in that I'm
assuming you're legally allowed to do
business right so why are you suddenly
going to the legal stuff it's like do
you not believe that you need so now
it's like do I want them in my house if
they think that if they're worried more
about the legal stuff than doing me a
deadly disease or my my 7 my 80 year old
mom a deadly disease yeah some I've had
two instances where I've but we're gonna
we're gonna go ahead and have the guy
come in on Monday but you know our
fix-it guy was gonna have to come in and
fix the roof and he's like 65 70 and
like this is not an easy in and out of
people's houses he probably doesn't have
the best and watching skills it's like
oh but also poor like what are you doing
going in other people's houses but hey
people are paying rent and like I
actually paid rent on the first and
needed you to come in on the first to
fix something so I feel a little lord I
hadn't paid rent to be a lot harder to
be like hey it's leaking come fix it and
we're not paying rent and that is also
like our rent market and mortgage market
and we're gonna need to have a debt
Jubilee and what does that look like and
really what does it look like do I get
to own this place now because why does
my landlord get to own it right yeah
because they got into debt first how
does that and does everyone get a place
what if you were in an air B&B when this
all went down do you get to keep the
urban you know like yeah you know what
shelter is actually really important and
everyone needs a place to stay and
that's what needs to happen in India and
Philippines and everywhere else as well
as people need safe house ian's that
they can retreat to and things like this
happen happened which means people need
housing this yes this has become just
let's talk about cope in nineteen
external Friday is like let's talk about
how broken it is at the moment which is
unfortunately every part yes I hope
people aren't complete
tired of it but I still find it
fascinating which is I don't know if
it's been like the more fringe stuff
that doesn't be talked about as much
like a lot of it suggests still like
governments and the disease and this and
that we've been you know tackling what
that means and two or three steps down
the road maybe hopefully that's more
interesting I found this conversation
interesting yeah I think you know it was
we started up with no topic and then
just drove right in and had no problem
so I was like we we have no problem
finding things to talk about these days
yeah the issue is if you can't bring up
coca diet team let's see let's not let's
not bring it up you see how that works
next week everything so I've been
hanging out at home for no reason the
rest of the world hanging out at home
yes does a pretty watch although like
late-night talk posts and stuff doing it
from there like look it's hard to do
some professional from your office isn't
it like no laughs try or like no no idea
yeah you know audience thing is
interesting because you're so used to
hearing me laugh track and you're like
that was a joke right
like why all right yeah there's an
electron yeah like it anybody pause a
lot of times they'll pause for the joke
it's like wow they really do practice
that or at least they've been doing it
for 20 years now
that's so challenging I mean they're
privileged to have that problem but as
I've been thinking too it's very
challenging it's also like I don't I
don't know whether all the all the shows
I know they all stopped filming but did
they wrap up like are we having season
finales and then are we ever going back
to have like I don't know I don't know
because no one's dealing with it right
like like none of the healthcare
documentaries you know sorry not
documentaries healthcare shows how the
anything to do with with pandemic unless
they already had it planned and it's
their story right it's not koban 19 and
then like there are those stories that
are dealing with this time period the
stories are everybody online kind of
doing it saying it and it's like well I
don't know like media right now is
fascinating because it's either all Cove
it or no Cove it like you can watch
things that do not mention it and our
world changed so fast and now everyone
talks about it all the time but it's
also like well then you want to get away
from it well you can't because there's
nowhere to retreat to everyone's if you
can only binge watch your show and
ignore that this is
going on for a bit and then the back
this is this is our normal thing and
then there's the weird like hybrids
where it's a non kovat like an
entertainment source that's centered
around like cook like I joined a a
Facebook group called quarantine karaoke
or it's just sick people singing from
home during all this and like people
playing music and stuff and so it's like
it's not about it but it's because of it
that is also I like those ones yeah
those ones are are good but then people
are also like don't know we can't
mention it cuz it's just here and it's
like people are that is fine in I don't
we don't need to mention it in
quarantine karaoke but like in other
ones for your like no people are going
through actual emotional and spiritual
and all of this stuff and we need to
have tools it's actually what Kira had
mentioned doing a solution raising on
mental health and emotional support okay
let's do that let's do that because I'm
gonna find out if she's know if she's
available at 8:30 in the morning and do
one of them actually live in the morning
on my hour one see how that goes
it was just the two of us that'll work
yeah or we can help us Lisa knows the
topic
I mean we're not gonna actually do the
thing but there's lots we could do at
10,000 people and $100,000 for mental
health like quarantine karaokes one of
those like that was about me and Kevin I
think we're trying to do Karen try to do
singing on zoom to see if we could you
can't you can't I don't know how bands
are doing it in different places the leg
and everything else it just doesn't yeah
yeah I haven't seen any bands doing it
like from different locations that would
be interesting to see and like I don't
think it there was one service that
would do it but you're gonna have a
delay and if you do how do you sync up
yeah one cuz it's all precise yeah one
can record it and then send it to the
other person and then you create a video
of it but right yeah we're doing it live
yeah everyone can play their part and
then you can put it together but yeah I
guess I don't know if you're not
listening to each other and you know
your parts are well enough and you're
all working off a metronome you might be
able to do it but that's not yeah that's
really hard
why not worth it all right well right in
an hour I got a head out thanks for
joining us we're back again tomorrow at
9:00 right I am
yeah same same well we're just keeping
it at that time right now right and then
well I don't figure out the cheapy and
one later I'll throw the grill join us
all right so we just need to post that
since in facebook groups the people
gonna play join and we'll see you
tomorrow and next week and we're not
going anywhere
welcome to the quarantine welcome to our
new normal did we fix the world it's
been an hour okay