hi it's Eric Weinstein just to put it
simply were blown away we've just
released the first episode of the portal
which is my new show and we had a
response and a reaction that we really
couldn't have imagined so while we have
several shows in the can and we have
some great interviews lined up instead
one of the producers asked me to simply
come in and do an extended
extemporaneous riff to say what the show
is likely to be about now there was no
script
there was no preparation and there'll be
a little bit of light editing but more
or less what we thought might be
interesting is to have you in on the
ground floor if you're listening and
subscribing at this point in our history
you deserve to know how we're thinking
what's up next without having all of the
rough edges rounded and polished for
your listening pleasure so it's gonna be
a little bit imperfect but I hope you'll
enjoy what comes next which is an
improvisational riff on where we may be
going with the show the portal hope you
like it
[Music]
hello I'm Eric Weinstein and you found
the portal this is our second episode
perhaps you caught our first one which I
interviewed my friend Peter teal in that
conversation Peter and I discussed the
great many things but one of the let's
say overarching themes is that somehow
the world around us seems to have been
completely miss explained and not only
miss explained for a short period of
time but perhaps miss explained for
decades without anyone much noticing at
least that was our contention the
contention is that because of a dizzying
amount of change in a small number of
sectors we have misinterpreted what is
going on much more generally as change
across a great number of sectors
likewise while we have generally enjoyed
a period of relative peace and
prosperity we have been somewhat innard
to the growing danger that comes from
the sheer amount of violent potential
that is so far been kept under wraps in
the stasis that followed World War two
so these two features of our world that
is a generally peaceful world in which
the potential for violence and
destruction has gotten ever greater in a
world in which a small number of sectors
are advancing at a breakneck pace but
leaving behind the majority of sectors
where nothing much seems to be happening
seems to be a relatively uncommon
picture to be discussed at least in
official channels what the portal is
going to be about is breaking this
bubble this is a bubble that we believe
in some sense has been around since the
early 1970s and almost all of us have
grown up having our lives defined and
determined by the set of common
misconceptions about the world in which
we live so what is the portal the portal
is an attempt to end this bubble to look
beyond the intellectual laziness and
stasis that is available everywhere
through the institutional media through
let's say legacy sense making structures
and to start listening in on a different
conversation
a conversation that many of you are
relatively unfamiliar with in which
different players different names are
rotated into the spotlight and the
familiar pundits and Talking Heads are
rotated out now what is it that this
group of people is thinking about what
are they working on what do they believe
well in part many of them are worried
about the idea of complacency and
excited about the idea of breaking
through a portal into a different space
sometimes that's in an area like radical
life extension where so far up until the
present almost no one has gotten beyond
the biblical age of Moses set at a
hundred and twenty years by convention
if that's been the hard stop some people
are now dreaming about life expectancies
that could go into 200 or 300 years if
we could only find access to the right
molecular mechanisms likewise in areas
like physics we have the possibility
that there are two main dominant
theories that are irreconcilable and
therefore incomplete what have we had an
ability to bridge those theories and
come up with a much more detailed and
accurate theory that spanned both the
phenomena covered by Einstein's general
relativity and the quantum theory known
as the standard model would there be
something to do something wholly
unexpected we don't know we also dream
of limitless energy perhaps fusion
technology or incredible storage devices
would allow us to harness you know much
greener energy sources perhaps we would
find some way of living in a world of
abundance in which we could print things
freeing us from drudgery using
artificial intelligence and machine
learning and learn to have much more
harmonious and fulfilling existences or
perhaps this wooden leash some sort of
economic problem whereby very few of us
would be able to earn a living in this
new world and that the abundance that we
thought we craved would in fact be a
curse in disguise what I want to do is
to talk to you very simply and plainly
about the problems that we currently
face that almost no one is willing to
us and that is that we have a world
largely built for rapid growth in which
that kind of broad growth is no longer
found easily simply by looking with
better instruments with more patience
and more detail at the world in which we
live let me give you a slightly
different picture of where we are as a
society one that you've probably not
thought of imagine somebody who has
graduated from high school but one two
three years later hasn't found something
else to do with their life and they're
hanging around the same high school as
fewer and fewer of the students that
they once knew continued to attend
classes effectively this is getting
creepier and creepier and I think that
that's in large measure where we are
with the technological revolutions that
we have undertaken at some point it was
incredibly cool to figure out how to
place a long-distance call between
continents but this has become
commonplace likewise many of the
fantastic things that once got us
excited about the release of every new
iPhone now has us relatively unexcited
about the new suite of apps and features
that every new phone promises will be
slightly different than the one before
so I think what's important to think
about is how optimistic we once were
what did we think we were going to do I
think we thought we were going to be
curing diseases wouldn't it be great not
to have lost anyone in your family from
cancer when we declared a war on cancer
in the early 1970s what did we think we
were going to be doing with energy
didn't we think that fusion was around
the corner
if you think about all of the things
that we could be doing we've learned in
most of these areas that it is no longer
mature to hope to imagine that somehow
we are going to be able to make the
future very different than the present
yes things will get a little bit better
but are they going to get dramatically
better are we going to be leading a life
in our here and our now that would allow
a kind of escapist lifestyle that we saw
on Star Trek or even in Star Wars which
came out in the 60s and 70s respectively
I think that in general most of us
realized that these dreams have remained
dreams for so long that we've consigned
them to the world of children perhaps
very dim people believe these things
what I'm interested in is trying to get
the smartest most dynamic and most
agenting people in our society once
again talking to each other and ignoring
the people who are most focused on
dampening all of our enthusiasm now
perhaps you think look this doesn't
sound very scientific
shouldn't we be relying on the best
systems we have for example isn't
peer-reviewed science the gold standard
well I would say no peer review is a
relatively recent invention and I would
even say an intrusion into the hard
sciences in 1953 when the double helix
was elucidated by Watson and Crick they
submitted it to the journal Nature
but it was never peer-reviewed why
because an editors job was to figure out
whether it was worthy of publication and
in fact the editor at the time if I
recall correctly said that anybody who
saw this paper would be so influenced by
it that he couldn't take the risk
sending it out for any kind of review
well if that's true let's say peer
review isn't really the centerpiece of
our science is the scientific method the
centerpiece of our science well at some
level sure it's like proof checking but
a lot of the work that we do in science
has been incredibly imaginative and you
might even say it's been irresponsible
until it comes into final form and can
be reconciled with experiment but
instead we've developed a culture in
which immediately upon proposing
something we are told that the cynic
wanan of science is that there be an
agreement between theory and experiment
well this is wholly untrue in fact if
you go back to Paul Derek's
great Scientific American article in the
early 60s he says that it is much more
important that a physical theory have
mathematical beauty and that we learned
to trust a theory even when it doesn't
agree with experiment if it has a kind
of intellectual coherence to it but how
often are people pointed to something
like directs 1963 paper in fact you
could look to Jim
Watson who's told us that in order to
make great advances we have to be
irresponsible now this is a very odd
feature of the world many of our top
people do not seem to play by the rules
that have been set for everyone else and
the question is if we are in a situation
in which we have unleashed such
incredible destructive power as we did
with the hydrogen bomb and in
potentially unlocking the cell why is it
that we are so incredibly timid about
what it is that we might do next we have
all the destructive power that we need
already at our fingertips what we don't
have is the ability to escape our fate
in fact what we need is to find the
portal to find a way out to find new
economic vistas that will allow far
larger numbers of people to participate
without causing an ecological disaster
if you take all the people let's say in
India China and Bangladesh what have you
who are leading lives at a far lower
economic level than we are if you were
to elevate them to our current level as
we have in the United States you would
be causing an ecological disaster well
clearly we are not going to leave these
people behind we need them to be full
participants in whatever beautiful
future we're trying to create and that
future has to be ecologically sound
because we don't have the ability to
despoil the planet as we dream about
universal human prosperity so what are
we going to do well I think that the
most irresponsible thing to do is to
stop dreaming to get our dreams to be so
small that we're not embarrassed to
share them in public I think what we
need to do is to start dreaming much
more aggressively dream much bigger and
start dreaming in public with each other
harmoniously if we can for how our
dreams fight each other but at least
start unlocking the potential of human
imagination and not immediately
grounding every new idea in some sort of
race to see whether we can invalidate it
given it enough of a room to grow you
know this is how we used to talk about
protecting infant industries before we
decided that free trade should always be
the rule of the day and that we
have no barriers to protect new ideas in
a nursery where they might learn to
thrive before testing to see whether
they can survive as adults what we're
gonna do in this program is effectively
to declare war war on stasis war on
groupthink war on everything that has
enervated our society and we're going to
do it because we have the ability now to
compete with the networks that
previously grew up to distribute
whatever it was that was portrayed as
sense-making
you can tell that there's something
wrong with both CNN and Fox if you're
reading the New York Times carefully you
can tell that the narrative arcs in the
daily newspaper clearly have to have
been thought out to cover many days and
long before the facts are known somehow
we are living in somebody else's reality
what we need to do is to return to our
own future now there's no question that
we might make some serious mistakes
people may die there may be very serious
consequences of experimenting but it's
certain that if we stay here and we do
not attempt to grow beyond the problems
that we've previously created for
ourselves in decades past that the
future is not going to be appealing or
powerful enough to evade some of the
faiths that some people are seeing as
being nearly inescapable if we cannot
create a larger pie we're gonna have to
engage in a lot of zero-sum games we're
gonna have to deal an incredible amount
with some kind of social engineering
project which quite frankly I don't see
how having any hope of succeeding we're
barely able to hold a conversation could
we actually hold a constitutional
convention if our new technology
required that we rethink the boundaries
of what constitutes search and seizure
whether hate speech should be included
with free speech and our foundational
documents have we really gotten to a
place in which we can only look back
because we are afraid to look forward
the portal is going to attempt to answer
these questions so it might well be
asked how are we going to try to do
something different on the portal that
might actually have a significant impact
on our society and I'm going to begin in
a kind of unexpected place how are we
going to get
portal to be self-supporting well oddly
when we proposed this podcast a friend
of the program decided that he was in a
position through business success to
fund the portal and to in fact remove
the need for advertising from our desire
to broadcast and I thought about this
long and hard of course it's very
appealing to imagine that somebody cares
so much about what's happening on the
program that they're willing to bankroll
it however I think we've decided against
it at least initially and I wanted to
share some of my reasoning the reasoning
is that very few programs could possibly
afford to do that and as important as
this program is it's really not about me
it's about what can we do with sense
making done individualistically and
outside of any kind of institutional
control my belief is that if the more
people are able to podcasts the more
people are able to use these new
channels for outreach the greater the
likelihood that we can create an
ecosystem of interesting disruptive
ideas to change everything so in fact
it's much more important that we figure
out some way of fixing the business
model where all of these podcasts are
somehow delivering value that people are
at least initially unwilling to pay for
because we've all been taught to expect
that these things that we consume
electronically are free well we want to
have the same problem at least initially
as everyone else so that we can work on
it can we teach advertisers and
capitalists to stay the course when
somebody says something controversial
but responsible to weather a storm of a
boycott can we create what I've called
risk vertices who actually pledge some
loyalty to the people that you most want
to see talking about the issues you most
want to hear discussed if they can do so
responsibly these risk for ties errs are
people that we're going to go in search
of so if you have a product that you
think is terrific then you want to reach
people with tremendous brand loyalty I
hope you'll consider being a risk Verta
for the portal podcast and that means
effectively getting to know us our
audience and not immediately
chuckling at the first sign that there's
some sort of social media storm coming
your way
furthermore I think we're gonna talk
about science and we're not going to be
dumbing it down I'm very frustrated that
very often when you see top quality
scientists going into let's say public
outreach mode that they very often
adulterate the subject matter in an
attempt to make it more understandable
now of course that's inevitable when you
have people specializing in very
difficult subjects that they've studied
for years but I also feel that partially
what happened is that we got into a
habit of under estimating the
intelligence of the audience rather than
giving the audience the need to look up
some terminology to make some forays of
their own with a search engine we've
gotten them into a complacent state
where if they don't immediately
understand something then somehow the
fault is with the broadcaster well I
think we reject this for a very simple
reason do you remember when TV was
called the idiot box I know that I'm of
an age that that was a very common thing
to do once upon a time but if you look
at all of the amazing things that have
been happening on TV it's totally
changed the format to watch something
like Game of Thrones or The Sopranos or
Mad Men now why is that because the
character lines and the storylines and
the development are so much more complex
than anything people are able to do in a
smaller format that in fact television
quite surprisingly became the most
distinguished media in which one can now
write well likewise I think we need to
do the same thing for the public
discussion of science we need to draw
more of you in and count on the fact
that we've been under estimating the
intelligence of our followers for quite
some time and start playing up to your
level and we may lose you along the way
but I have faith that with our ability
to monitor your comments and listen to
your feedback that we can find an
entirely new level of explication in
which many of you will find that far
from being left behind by specialists
you are actually able to participate in
conversations that have previously been
restricted only to experts so I think
we're going to try to pitch it at a
higher level we're gonna try to rescue a
business model
so that we can get more people with the
ability to experiment in front of a
camera as I'm doing now but we've also
decided to explore some topics that I
think could break some serious ground in
particular I think that one of the
things we're really interested in doing
is talking about a couple of new
economic models that have been shared
with the world rather narrowly up until
now one of which involves what might be
called cozy and immigration which I'll
explain later shows that simply opening
borders is in no way a free market
solution that you have to securitize
rights and allow people to trade them in
order to get free market economics to
work in the immigration area another of
which has to do with bilateral trade and
the geometry of markets culminating
eventually in a model of humans in which
they are allowed to change their tastes
now it sounds very strange to say that
economic theory falls apart when human
beings change their tastes but since at
least the late 1970s we've had an excuse
in place in the work of Becker and
Stigler that allows us to make
assumptions about human beings that are
known to be wildly untrue and the way
out strangely enough is through
differential geometry the differential
geometry of markets so that's something
that I think we're going to be very
interested in bringing to you I don't
know whether the idea of geometric
markets is something that can be easily
explained to a mass audience but this
theory of geometric marginalism is in
fact a starter theory that if that is
successful might allow us to discuss an
even more profound attempt which would
be this concept that I've called
geometric unity now when I talk about
getting off the planet I have no idea
whether or not it is in fact possible to
go beyond the solar system nobody's ever
done it it's been relatively
irresponsible to think in these terms
ever since we've understood what we're
up against in particular in the form of
Einsteins restrictions through the
general and special theories of
relativity but I do know this if we are
to have a hope of visiting all of those
exact
locations we can see in the night sky
when we're far from a city and the moon
is not blocking out all of the stars and
galaxies I do know that if we are going
to have a hope of visiting some place
truly remote it's probably going to come
through a better understanding of the
source code of reality now up until this
point we've talked about this in terms
of the so-called theory of everything
and if you'll notice we have a very
funny pattern about this a very small
number of highly regarded physicists
have been entitled to talk and dream
openly about a theory of everything most
commonly in the form of string theory
yet the current string theoretic really
revolution which began in 1984 was
something called the anomaly
cancellation has largely petered out
true some people diodes in the field
will continue to say that this is the
best time to enter theoretical physics
and that even if some of the original
hype was misplaced that there's no
reason to think that the long term
prospects are dim well that's not true
we all know that that's not true why
well we've had to buy an enormous
accelerator in Geneva in which to test
some of our earlier theories and in fact
while it found the what appears to be
the Higgs particle it's found very
little else beyond the standard model in
fact nothing of significance are we
going to continue to fund such machines
when our successes become more remote
are we to continue to be able to attract
the top minds as we have always been
able to attract them into theoretical
physics again I think that as other
occupations continue to offer more money
and physics offers less stability and
less interest and excitement as a field
it's going to be very difficult to
compete for talent if we're going to do
something now is the time we still have
the expertise we still have enough of
the infrastructure sure in my opinion it
may be decaying and I don't even really
particularly get along with this
community but this is the community of
greatest agency of greatest intelligence
and it has to be reinvigorated we need
to get this community more money we need
to get the more secure
and we need to get them once again
dreaming up the future now they brought
us the future when they brought us the
World Wide Web which came out of CERN
when they developed the semiconductor
they effectively invented molecular
biology as a side project they ended
World War two and they gave us the
communications technology in which our
phones communicate with remote towers
and allow us to connect to people a
world away with very little delay in
essence our entire economy owes itself
to theoretical physics and are we gonna
let this field wither and die on the
fine because it hasn't been able to
succeed in roughly 45 years I would say
that this is the place that we have to
bring the fight people have not
understood how vulnerable we are when we
start to lose our most dynamic
communities and we can find ourselves
incapable of fighting for the resources
either in terms of neurons or in terms
of dollars that are necessary to sustain
our hope of progress further I think
we're going to explain a lot of our
theorizing some of which has been
covered in the annual edge essays for
edge dorg in which effectively we've
engaged in a ten-year strategy I've
always wondered what would be the best
way of sneaking a weapon through airport
security even though I've never
attempted to do anything like that I
always thought that the best way of
doing it would be to do it in pieces
where each piece is not entirely
understandable as being part of
something that is being screened for
well that's what I chose to do in the
edge essays that we'll be discussing
I think the first essay I wrote was
called go virtual young man which was in
response to what I was just learning
about in terms of Bitcoin another one
was about kayfabe or the system of lies
that is the substrate of professional
wrestling
that was about my fear of an election
cycle in which effectively everyone
would know that everything was fake but
we would still be somehow dependent on
the pantomime and theatrics in order to
conduct the business of
Society another one was on Russell
conjugation a Russell conjugation if you
don't know has to do with how we
emotionally shade our language so that
people can can understand what our
content is but they don't realize that
we are emotionally coercing them to feel
differently about things than they would
if they simply thought about them from
first principles so there's a large
number of essays that I want to discuss
with you including one on anthropic
capitalism now the question of unthe
rapid capitalism is simply this was the
last 200 years an anomaly was it a very
bizarre time in which effectively
markets were without parallel in
organizing human activity and is it
possible when we say something like late
stage capitalism that we've actually
blown through this period where
capitalism its itself a danger to our
society now we have nothing else to pick
up from it if we look outside our
windows in any major metropolitan area
we'll see that people are engaged in
some self-organizing activity and if our
only two possibilities of keeping that
going are either to allow the market to
run up relatively unfettered or to begin
telling people what to do is if central
command was viable then we're in a
really tough spot I think we're gonna
have to start thinking about new systems
and I don't know what those systems will
be but since we've been able to reach
major candidates like the up-and-coming
Andrew yang on the Democratic side I'm
at least hopeful that there are places
in which these new ideas might have a
hearing so to sum up what is the portal
the portal is a search for some way out
of the stasis in which we have lived if
our lives have largely been lived in an
intellectual bubble that dates from the
early 70s it's time to pop that bubble
and to find out what's on the outside I
hope you'll join me trying to find the
portal and we can go through it together
thank you
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]
[Music]