[Music]
so I've got my list of questions for you
cuz you read the feet Erica trilogy now
no I'm almost finished for Cherica
trilogy yeah okay come on the last book
I'm halfway through the last book so we
should explain first what that is is the
re-released version of the first three
books battle Thunderbird and John said
it lists the three books are the medic
rats which was released in the year 2000
regional Swedish version came out two
years later in English and then the
global Empire that came out three years
later and then the body machines that
came out six years after that so the
three books together are meant as a
trilogy
meaning the netic rats is a book on
technology and a book on the class
structure or the forthcoming digital
society which we now you know we see the
birth of that society now twenty years
later so so it's essentially a Marxist
analysis of our future class society
built on did and then the global Empire
that came out three years later is the
book that understands the world now as
imperial meaning that the Internet
Protocol is in itself an imperial
function meaning if we look at the world
technologically rather than politically
it's already an empire meaning
everything else like politics art and
everything else we do as humans it's now
subordinated to our an empire which is
technological it's a world empire it's a
war Olympic yeah protocol you cannot
escape from you number one you cannot
turn off the internet it will be on
forever from now on and number two were
all subordinate to it so that means even
the Chinese Communist Party and you know
the American government in Washington
everybody is supported to each protocol
meaning it all technology will now be
combined into one huge computer and then
we human beings eight billion of us have
to adjust to this phenomena so that's
what's called the global Empire
the third book at the bottom machines
then deals with what it needs to be
human as a result to the other two and
and this book is very close related to
the work of Antonio Damasio in the 90s
and Thomas Metzinger in the early
noughties Portuguese and a German
philosopher respectively
who worked a lot on a sort of anti anti
Cartesian idea what it means to be human
and this is what the book is called the
body machines since when ad card is
famous for his quote that if the human
beings did not have a soul separate from
the body we would be nothing the body
machines yeah and we're saying you know
we are these body machines you know we
are his worst nightmare
meaning that we are and therefore we
think so you would have to you would
have to look at the card and say that no
you're wrong mr. Descartes because it's
actually the opposite way around we we
only find some kind of self
consciousness at best at the end of a
process to tie together don't we
that's the only beings as prior to
thinking in other words or yes
absolutely yes there has to be a body
first with a brain inside that body for
this function to to be able to think at
all
and the thinking is a byproduct of other
processes that are actually more
important is that where you would call
physicalism I've been following some of
your conversations yeah it's modest you
know what kind of neutral ask to the
nature of the substance of reality so
we're not saying that the the universe
necessarily has to be a materialist or
physical phenomenon it can be more than
that but or something different but the
universe is same and it's only one
substance and that's where we agree it
Spinoza
and so do Damacio and so the messenger
they're also stances and it turns out
that any person out there who's an
advanced neuroscientist today and also
does philosophy turns out to be a spin
assist it's it's you know spinning
spinning sesame is a consequence of the
fact that you understand out
neuroscience works and he's the first
sort of serious monist
or not the first but no western monist
okay
you could proudly argue that the Thomas
akina's bow was closed to mana so he did
not like dualism at least it was very
own place with it and it's also probably
Thomas akina's didn't finish he he set
out to do because they probably
discovered you cannot have an afterlife
and go somewhere else besides living on
planet Earth you die because your body
composed decompose and mertens and it's
gone without the body that cannot be
mined so um Thomas akina's and some of
the Scholastic's were onto these ideas
and they were uncomfortable with
Christianity's adherence to play towards
dualism
but we know sighs the guy who really
makes the radical break in the West we
do an ism and he deduces Western
Morrison and he does Western Manas him
from a materialist perspective weary us
later Hegel does the same thing he just
Westermann ism from an idealistic
perspective um meaning they don't really
care none of them what the substance
consists of as someone is one substance
and the substance can have okay doesn't
matter if it's material or spiritual the
that's not important no it's the same
thing with emergence theory which said
exist and I are working at the moment
this is an area that philosophy sort of
sloppy put aside until recently and an
emergency really means that for us to
understand the similarities between the
Big Bang and the birth of life you know
you understand emergencies like physics
and biology and the victors of emergence
which is what physics developed into but
all it is developed into to understand
these phenomena we need we don't
necessarily need to understand what life
is and how it started we don't
necessarily need to understand what the
Big Bang is or how it started
we just need to accept that they did
start at a certain point along the time
axis we had the birth of physics we had
the birth of biology so we can do
emergence theory and discuss what an
emergency's or what a Victorian
emergences which is for example the
field of biology we can discuss that
without knowing
how it all started what I would say
technology as the extension of the human
body changes what it means to be human
so I think this is even more important
than the fact even being
self-consciousness about have language
that we have culture what's really
important with even beings what makes us
different they're animals is that we
have a very advanced technological
environment around us that we have
created so we have magic first and then
we dream about what if magic could come
true and there are some people you know
cooking soups and try to conduct magic
or or you know tarot cards to try to
cannot magic other people but and
becoming engineers educate themselves
and actually do the proper map you can
that's called technology so um a we are
home with technological so the proper
magic is technology that's that's her
yesterday's magic is today's technology
okay
what's called clairvoyance in the past
now called smartphones today bingo so so
that's very important to understand how
important technology is because to
realize the alchemists were whereas as
empirical as they could be at that time
no yeah they were cooking little soups
and things but they were at least trying
to conduct science and some of the
chemists like Isaac Newton also then
became great scientists so yes we have
alchemy to thank for a lot of great
stuff that was actually done later but
what's important here is the emphasis on
the universe is being one substance okay
yeah that also means within that
substance there are not only many
attributes but they can also be
emergences so for example out of a black
hole a new universe could get
kick-started that's perfectly feasible
in our philosophy that's emergent that's
a new emergence in that case so the the
big bang for that universe the beginning
of that universe would be a new
emergence so we have to have a proper
emergence theory which were working on
at the moment we cannot parallel
universes and we can also within our
current universe have sort of you know
drops of new new systems new laws and
new habits within them for example like
biology is different from chemistry in
chemistry
physics so they're all different
emergencies and that's what we need
proper emergency were to understand this
then possibly science can one day tell
us how life got started and science can
one day tell us how the bending up if
they can do that one day at least then
already here for Sophocles solve the
problem of what in emergences okay so
the traditional like let's say critique
of monism would be that you know it
doesn't acknowledge difference right
and then the traditional critique of
dualism would be it doesn't an
acknowledge like oneness well I'm just
going over the couch I know I missed a
the opposite I would say the opposite
monism does recognize difference because
there's obviously difference you and I
are not the same things right so
modernism recognizes that there is
opposite okay I would say that
multiplicity the idea that the universe
has all this manifold of things there's
so much in the universe and there's so
much difference in universe it's
actually a result to monism no I would
say that dualism doesn't have much in
defense of it when you start looking at
it because the first Pro module is is
that spirit and body are two different
substances then the question is since
character body obviously are connected
in human being and how the fuck should
they communicate with each other grapes
and then you end up with more and more
substance and you're enough for this
idea of the soul or something that
connects the body and the spirit or
something like that I don't even think
that's the case I think the card was
perfectly how can we just a solar in a
body period so but you know well you end
up with the third and then you need
connections between those three and then
you end up with five substances known of
a sudden you've got billions of
substances that are no longer connected
with one another and then problems like
gravity messes it up for you in for
example physics because obviously
biologies contained within physics so
the the emergence of biology exist
within physics and requires fatigue
to exist without being reduced to
physics in repairs 4/6 accessory okay in
a physical universe
everything is connected with everything
else more or less that means it is truly
one substance and that will be you know
the container within which all the
different universes exist and even if we
only philosophically consider that there
might not be anything material that
connects different universes there might
be such separate entities that they have
no longer any connections with each
other period okay if that would happen
though we would still have to think of
it for our human little minds to grasp
it we have to think of it and this
illusion so dickfist and are working on
here is instead of a hyperspace which
physicists do which within which then
the different universes would be chained
so maybe think of a metaphor that has a
hyperspace I mean the type of space the
different universes exist to have space
in them so that the mistake there is to
always think of space as primordial
which it isn't so since time is primary
to space in process which is what we
have to widen that means that we would
have to think again as we talked about
before you and I that means we require
an extra dimensional time compared to
the classical physics tutorial this time
axis yeah we call that hyper time you
could also call hyper time a meta vector
or a hyper vector if you like so this
would be the container of all of
everything else that exists so um yeah
but you know we don't know that yet and
we probably don't know it until we
figure out what the big bang with yes
because even if the big bang is an
emergence it could be an emergency
some other kind of container lord I know
that physics uh split itself into two
over the last 100 years it's now
separated between quantum physics and
classical physics meaning classical
physics is a separate emergence from
quantum physics because they offer it's
differently so um we don't know that yet
but it's an interesting idea
and we could at least but if time is
relative even if it even if all's the
arrow time it only goes from one
direction still relative in the current
universe so we for example have to sort
of split time so but we can have a hyper
term you can have a sort of continue on
two weights we then add the current
universe which turns out to look very
discrete meaning the current universe is
actually on or off it's zeroes and ones
in a very fundamental sense well that's
interesting with the analogy of
computers well in this case it turns out
that physics has discovered this
independently of computers so just look
similar to computers but it means for
example because we're raising computing
I mean we might go into quantum
computers eventually but that is
actually irrelevant the universal
physics so what we've discovered is that
if the universe and its expansion is an
expanse of information because the
information cannot be destroyed
meaning that information runs opposite
to entropy
meaning that if entropy is expanding the
information extraction mean that's why
the universe expands okay that's a
contrary theory to entropy well that's
like we have a it's not discussed a the
idea of something opposite of entropy
called centra P in our degrees Sophie
Meghan through P another term that's
being used for that it turns out that
maybe negentropy or Center P our
information because lunar Siskin is
proven information is not destroyed
inside my house okay I see if
information is never destroyed it
there were in the universe and there's
obviously been a lot of information
produced over the past thirty one eight
billion years that means that expansion
of the universe is probably referred
back to the fact that the amount
information of universe is expanding all
the time mm-hmm so what does this have
to do with human intelligence because
you know we're getting stupider on some
level right
but then we at the same time we have
this huge access to to information right
that's the simultaneously so but it's
very to do with us and this is the
problem with the word intelligence we're
using the intelligence not both about
machines and about human beings ok and
turns out that we talk of machine
intelligence it does have a relation to
physics so we talk about quantum
information theory and expansion of the
universe is the result of
ever-increasing information that's never
destroyed ok if you talk about that way
that means the universe operates somehow
pretty similar to a huge computer that
cannot be destroyed so it's a very
interesting analogy to the idea that the
internet saves absolutely everything and
we're creating with the Internet's one
new digital memory the records at least
all human history meaning that
everything that you and I and all the
other 8 billion people on this planet
are doing at the moment is now being
recorded and almost all of its saved for
the future to be processed later
hopefully by some kind of machine
intelligence to do whatever it wants
with it that means that there are
similarities here between the machines
and the universe we must be careful not
to take the analogy too far because
whenever we had a major technological
breakthrough in the past philosophers
and physicists were all to happen to
jump onto it and then make it analogous
to the way they looked at the world
through physics and biology so that
could be a dangerous path to take what
we do know is that physics as we know it
operates discretely on the most
fundamental level meaning that spins go
into on or off and then they freeze in
time basically and they become history
so if that's the way the universe
operates it has similarities with
computers it doesn't mean that we can go
into black hole and access that
information and somehow I know what went
on before or in the past because the way
we store information on computers even
if it is zeros and ones and we'll freeze
them in time it's still radically
different from the way nature houndred
stuff so there are now that you see here
that are very very careful we should be
careful with because
that makes me think of sort of a
question I had for you you know about
your title machine machine man and you
know in McGilchrist books he's always
saying that the metaphor of human beings
as machinist is not accurate he hates
that but actually I think he's wrong so
you might not like that but what I do
say though is that instead of going to
physics define an analogy for
understanding human intelligence if
you've got to make a separation between
machine intelligence and human
intelligence
number one machine intelligence is
technological and it's a similarities
with fish sticks
so there is promise difference between
human intelligence and machine
intelligence number one is that machine
intelligence is built on physics so we
can take analogies from unsaved for
example quantum information theory and
maybe apply them to create a great
narrative about machine intelligence but
human eternity is biological hey
biological beings and biology operates
very differently from physics it's a
different emergence so that means the
analogies here between man and machine
are really bad so you're saying we have
to you have to look at those two
emergence within their own rules and
domains and not mix the two or
absolutely so we can compare human
beings to animals and even to plants and
we can look at seven genes for example
and study sentence which is way more
important than the overrated concept of
consciousness and because consciousness
doesn't exist until you have itself
really self consciousness is nothing but
sentence that has sense result but
sentence is interesting scent is
something we share with animals and
plants and we can then understand how
plants and especially animals store
information and create memory over time
actually you cannot even have life
without memory because in your life form
in its separation from the outside world
creating a membrane and and within the
membrane itself all of us have a memory
it learns from me out so it doesn't
repeat its mistakes and this business
storage this is memory this is how
biology memorizes so it's very very
different
from say the memory of the computer
which is Cirrus once and electricity and
hopefully can be frozen in time forever
and then turned on again by adding it
okay one more thing I want you to
clarify is what what's your problem with
the idea of consciousness it's overrated
it's extremely overrated that's the very
narcissistic it's the word is used
constantly everywhere especially by
people who consider themselves to be
spiritual and and the sitting meditating
she's some kind of pure consciousness
and they talk about ego death and all
kinds of silly things I'm getting less
and less interested in that shit it just
doesn't take us anywhere and it's
usually just babble so a brain is
interesting there's science it's
interesting how the brain operates is
incredibly interesting but you know any
feeling you have any emotion any
thoughts you have has a materialistic a
version of itself that goes on
simultaneously why that happens
so a you know the brain operates
constantly and and whatever we perceive
and what we process and what you think
then has its own person of it in the
brain otherwise they wouldn't be
changing at all in our perception or or
in our understanding of the world so I'm
definitely moodily that phenomenology
has to be understood that's basically a
physicalist biological phenomenon you
know we are we are animals what we have
as human beings is that we've added
language on top of that and we are the
narratives to come with that which on
top of that those narratives obviously
that was special you know with the
center the universe and that we tiny
little gods that mummy loves us so much
there were special and all kinds of
things and that nurtures certain
narcissism which is it creates an
Anthropocene worldview which means what
put us at the center of things and then
we think that because narrative this
narrative must be created somewhere and
we think that narratives created through
our consciousness and we in that
constants we find a sense of self now
okay if you talk about a sense of self
you better talk about the sentence of
self and try to understand how that
operates we can do that a laboratory we
know scientists and we then just
the self is the last thing that happens
in a process for example of
problem-solving and decision-making is
involved and is usually we have to leave
a problem aside to be solved later or we
are sure about having solve we have to
move on to the next problem now we have
a heightened sense of self that's
exactly right
the sense of self is often really
heightened when we're doing something
very very risky and very dangerous and
we have incredibly alert of our
surroundings that that's the adrenaline
adrenaline is pumping in we feel very
much alive but that's because our sense
of self is an heightened now if that's
what mean consciousness that's fine it's
called self awareness
yeah consciousness consciousness is
basically just a lasting word it's a
fact there were some awareness okay now
I'm not that interested in awareness
because what we share with other animals
what's interesting for human beings is
sentence meaning that you have sense we
smell we touch we watch stuff we hear
stuff and we then process the
information that we get access to and
the first thing we do we have we have
that information in our brain that we
try to solidify world so there's a sense
that there's a world out there and we
then in relation to this world Percy
that we act so we are involved as an
agent in this world and when we then
proceed that were an agent within this
world we're acting with that creates the
cells of agency and that agency is
called the self now please note that I
managed to describe this now it's never
scientifically without using the word
consciousness not even once okay well so
the cell I what I'm hearing a bit else
always that the Tsarina the self the
self varies in intensity it's here and
then it goes away and so it's not so
yeah that's some kind of permanent thing
yeah yeah and it's not unified at all
you know you know when your girlfriend
or your wife tells you she's just
changed your mind so you said this ten
minutes ago is she sister yeah that was
ten minutes ago
she means there was another self two
minutes ago and he's no different so for
the so she was ten minutes ago
well changes time
there is not even a continued self you
know the self is really marginal yeah in
your book you said that the ego is like
a rainbow or something you said it's
like okay and it looks like something
but but it's uh you know it's not
something substantive anuses this is all
I know this is a Buddhist analogy this
years all the time as well it's it's
nothing substantive at nothing permanent
substantial or anything that you can
really you know entrap in in
consciousness or that make sense well
you know the importance of the self it's
not that strong in - religious and
there's a reason for that because the
world like you actually act within he's
way more important than you are and as
tribal beings we do human beings are I
think it's a better model because
actually what's important to us is the
tribe that we belong to in our community
and we want to find a purpose in the
community which means they want to be
agents within that community
now with that community that holds us
responsible for certain things you know
we have obligations to have to fulfill
we memorize even our commitments that
the community holds us you know
answerable to and those things create a
sense of self as well and then of course
your language your parents scream at you
when you're a kid in the indigo you
there you there you either and once
they've done that for a few months your
little baby you will internalize that
you and so we are constantly in or a
culture reinforce the idea that there's
a self and because the soft and citizen
has to think of itself as being terribly
important for life to be meaningful that
strengthens self awareness in self
consciousness but it's a very modern
phenomenon it's not that important you
know the cultures and rather if you go
to Buddhist restoration is very much
what is important is that you're in this
world the good this is a world of the
Reston's is a world of endless potential
so thus Erastus want to build
skyscrapers and the bootys just wanted
you know made it take the whole thing
away either one you could choose which
you prefer you know we did that you can
you can use we can produce arrested okay
you have your buddy Nobu dystopian
skyscrapers no really don't you know
they just build sort of weird temples
and Paco does they don't even live gotas
and yeah yeah nice little Gardens - yeah
we don't we don't we don't mind Buddhism
and unless we talked a lot about before
Buddhist mr. Roston have shared peaceful
history with each other whereas her
essence was always at war with Islam and
Christianity and the reason was so a
students of course was a war with both
Islamic Christian Buddhist religions and
that is heretic heretic - to the to this
or Aston faith which is radically modest
the forced of the Gnostics on the money
can't sell so I would accept the Muslims
and the Christians that was the problem
for the restaurants eventually because
the Middle East in Europe ended up being
duelist cultures and we're finally now
following Spinoza 400 years of hard
fellows go work overcoming Christianity
in Islam at least intellectually in the
West and in the Middle East and we're
beginning to see the light at the end of
tunnel and return to Muslim which we
then can share with a major religions of
the East this is my deep commission but
listen we should go back to the Victoria
trilogy that was the very important you
know what have you discovered and you
say that the machines can teach us to
love the stranger so I want to hear you
talk more about that what that means
okay well there's the infinite demand
and the infinite demand is in itself for
a so an idea and the problem with the
infinite demand is that you know one of
the problems I had with me too was that
it was an infinite demand from women
versus men meaning that the women love
to have an accusation they could put on
the wall and always use forever against
men that's exactly how they meet you
moon put structure it's just like men
are abusers women are the victims of
this abuse this has been the case from
time immemorial
this will always be the case and that's
a women should be allowed to use that as
a weapon against men when every suits
women's interests I didn't buy ink
that I don't think anything is forever
to begin with and I didn't think that
was a fair world view either I think men
and women are about equally bad or
equally good or whatever so uh but the
prow of the infinite demand is that it's
used by rose soyons have be done for the
last 300 years that's like they accuse
you of something that's wrong and no
matter how much we pay your debts for it
you will not be forgiven that's the
infinite demand it's very very important
to stress that there's an infinite
demand in ethics that we need to deal
with and of course I do not subscribe to
number one because I don't believe in
infinity and number two I believe they
should be clear-cut goal if I have a
depth some kind of you know exactly I
repay that okay so there has to be a
clear way to repay your debt which is
real justice so sama Krejci has written
a beautiful book called about the
infinite demand towards the stranger and
he's correct in that's because when we
go into peace negotiations with foreign
tribe we know perfectly well all that
the Warriors and the hunters in our
tribe hate anything that looks different
from themselves because unfortunately so
terminology for you know the hundred and
fifty thousand years that we were tribes
crossing the planet crossing the
Tundra's and the Smurfs and trying to
survive in our tribes we would basically
kill anything that was different from
ourselves at that point racism for
example exists so it's a major
phenomenon that we need you now what the
priests always try to do is to convince
people that if if the God who is the
all-father our tribe and the God is your
father the tribe actually our two sons
of the same father say it could be
Abraham is the father both i-smile then
the people of Isacc and the people Islam
can find common ground they can create
for example a clan rather than being two
different trucks and they don't have to
go to war with each other they can build
the temple that they share they can
respect each other and they can start
trading with each other and because we
then build a ritual place between the
tribes we can then do d'etre
around the ritual place and we can build
cities these are the first cities in
history so you have to find the common
father is that what you're saying well
you you have to create a narrative you
know when you do mythical narrative
anything is allowed as long as things
interesting is the effect where these
two guys actually have a shared father
so they appreciate lineage
subtly they're the same okay if the
tribes just lost tribes as you'd be
unified within the same nation and of
course the birth of this is the clan and
we then move from clans to nations and
you know the history from the Bible
about the nation of this troll and the
Hebrews are left Egypt they walk to the
promised land there were different
tribes with the united under one nation
and we even had the humanik castellated
so you're not even that's why I claim
that the nation of Israel is the first
nationality the first proper nation in
history that we know so the nation of
Israel and the emperor of persia are the
two constant working with for the next
book incredibly interesting especially
as they're interconnected with each
other you cannot operate a nation to
operate a tribe
give me the nation consistent travel
tribes and some of these has no close
relationship to the outside world in
others that means that you love
borderlands he will have border areas
between the nation and the nations that
means some kind of trade between agents
is preferable to nations that no trade
with each other at all will probably
like to go to war with each other with
everybody some trade is the only
relationship we have between nations
that's not war so we basically choose
between war and trade so that's what
priests have always tried to do history
so what they have to do is that okay
let's maintain a trading relationship
and keep peace for as long as possible
because if we keep peace and don't go to
decadent that means we can create
civilization so we can create a more
advanced society we create more wealth
to be shared within the nation
so we know from history that if you have
long periods of peace we create more
wealth and we can then share that wealth
with the system suppose it's fit we have
more stuff to trade with and if we trade
with other nations they have other
advantages compared to us that's also
advantages for the different nations
okay we can create a bigger order now we
can logically understand this the
problem is that the people within the
tribes have a hard time to begin with
liking the guysss from the next clan
even more so liking people from other
nations only people are born to love
strangers are apparently people with the
shamanic traits so we can know from
studies from psychological studies these
weirdos that we categorize as humanity
test they don't care about skin color
sexual orientation if you get drug abuse
or whatever they don't care they just
don't more lies
they just just risk takers that are
infinitely fascinated with strangers
that's rare that's like 4% of the
population that I'm born with those
pressures on everybody and it's never
going to be everybody no it isn't and
the real challenge today that we have
now when we live within the global
Empire that we did not discuss in that
book or without 15 years ago but we're
going to discuss now is how then do we
build the system where people can
actually live within a global Empire
without tearing each other apart
now we discovered ready that the first
thing people used Internet's for is to
create hate groups so what do they do
they create their own little tribes they
find something that the share hatred to
an object and object yes and they
recreate hate groups and they have an
object outside the universe and this is
the same for people of the identity left
as it is for that entity right so
they're the same you know they have the
same problem they're all following fake
pharmacists we call it in digital TV do
they follow the fake leaders the fake
the science and they do so by
objectifying something they can share
hatred towards that can be why to the
central man or it can be anything that
isn't the wisest or sexual man the
problem is that they're identical
they're all rose swords and they're all
creating these identitarian groups and
they're still gonna cause havoc for the
foreseeable future god we haven't in
peeked in Europe it's getting worse here
England is the worst of them all right
so Europe is getting really messy
because identitarian all over the place
and with the alt-right and the out left
love each other because as long as they
take over the entire arena people don't
believe this any other way forward no
war okay what is that a natural response
to that well it's the same response that
we have to the climate crisis the only
way out of the climate crisis is to
build technologies that help us avert
the climate crisis the same thing goes
here when it comes to strangers well at
least tolerating each other to not kill
each other
so if you're not gonna have war across
the planet all kinds of wars and
widespread terror is more than it's 5200
years we need to create machines that
make it easier for people to like each
other and trade okay and this is what me
just clarify so we need machines but we
also need you said priests we need
negotiator we need people to go in
between the tribes and yep
so what is a machine in the priest I
guess that's my question
okay exactly we we wrote a book called
the netic rats that book came out twenty
years ago right on 19 years ago okay in
that book we discussed that any power
structure over time has an elite of
three different fields we call them real
symbolic and imaginary power real power
is those who have control of the assets
of any given society
it used to be land ownership then during
capitalism became capital or money these
days it is data the way data comes down
so in an intentional society it's having
possession of data the way in a
capitalist society was having possession
of money there were any feudalist
society was having position of land so
the major resource today to control how
powerless is data we have that nitocris
and there already it's called the
computer Klaus okay and the anarchists
opposing them are of course storing
their own data on their own hard drives
and our tiny little computer clouds and
things like that and that's probably the
next things gonna happen
a lot of people who refuse to take part
of the big computer class because they
don't want to be controlled by tech
giants and Chinese Communist Party's and
other rules of the world but anyway
those who own and control the data is
the first leg of the nitocris II they're
replacing the old bourgeoisie and the
old aristocracy so the first thing on
the other leg of that is is the
imaginary and the symbolic power so the
question is how they appear well the
creators are the first ones there so
what are the greatest things are the
guys who go to to know where to go next
meaning their cultural engineers and
they're in a way therapists like they
lead you where you need to go algorithms
are that so anybody builds an algorithm
and then ties the algorithm to your
computer clout has thereby covered to
all the three angles of an autocratic
power structure meaning the algorithms
will take over the world but the human
equivalent of the algorithm just
algorithm is a machine intelligence
human account that is the curator so he
used to word curator from the art world
let's say that anybody can guide you
where to go next
he's really valuable meaning the guys
who follow on Twitter the guys have a
hundred thousand followers so the guys
on Instagram one hundred thousand
followers or millions of followers are
always in this crater the leaders were
to go next
tell us what clothes to wear they tell
us what vocabulary they tell us we
subculture welcoming now these days that
guy's like a such as what kind of
personality type you are so it's we
switch thread in life you should pursue
this is this is where you should go in
life so they're like the Mart equivalent
of the elderly who guide your life these
are creators meaning they're more
important than the producers the value
is no longer in the production I'll say
for example art the valise is the
creating of the art meaning that the guy
who puts the creation together puts the
exhibition together it's more powerful
than the artist this is what's happening
now everywhere in the economy so the
economy is moving towards bands is
moving towards subcultures in moving
towards influencers they're like an
early sort of little Christian or future
creators I think employers are over in
the next ten years but they will replace
by more professional creators
who were directly with the algorithms
means that you're a human being or a
group of human beings who work directly
with an algorithm to assist people and
guide them where to go to find
information or guide them through life
or whatever you do your ik writer so the
creators are the second leg of this
power structure and there of course
locating where the nodes are so once the
guys who are or personify the nodes in
today's society start meeting each other
they end up living in city-states like
to buy in Singapore or gated communities
in California or Scandinavia and why
they thrive together like-minded people
who also have tons of followers out in
the world and they become the new
leaders of the world they don't even
have to pay attention to politics they
don't even have to be politicians the
get politicians even if they enjoy that
but they don't have to be because they
will still be way more powerful fishin's
sample that the gala peter thiel is way
more important now did he move to
technology and it's moved to the craters
okay the third leg' is the one that's
left that's what we define now next
where do we then put the symbolic power
and all of this and that's what we are
writing a narrative that's what priest
that's the grand narrative what story
yes now we're moving on to blockchains
now we're moving on to the technologies
that will only start to occur in the
2020s and did little bitty hits else and
this is the third leg of an autocracy
the symbolic arena symbolic arena if
you're as as I were of course the
churches and the mosques and the
synagogues and the priests and the monks
because they control the texts they hand
wrote the text they preached and they
could read and write and they were the
only ones I can read and write and also
stored history and that's why they were
immensely powerful they never aspired to
own the land or join the capital they
only aspire to be the truth sayers and
control truth now they were replaced by
academia okay which part of societies in
a huge crisis right now it cannot even
withstand attacks academia academia is
falling apart and it's happening
while you and I involved in building for
example monasteries for spirit of
monasteries now because we tried to
build new institutions of truth
production so you go to isolated base we
can actually find out the truth you need
Toto see your therapist way out on
either side we've isolated with three
weeks internship for smartphones any he
gives you a WASC or something just bring
you break through to you so you can
really understand what was actually
happening the world and what is your
position and let me stop you for a
second just about that so what you're
saying is that academia is the the
broken priesthood of the time which is
going to be replaced by a whole new
group of people who are much more savvy
and exactly as this is a technological
age more than anything what do you think
these new priests will do well what is
the number one obligation is to unify
the world mm-hmm
that is creating a grand narrative for
East and West and did you tell us mark
Stallman says correctly and that grand
narrative is the one we're working on of
course here because for priests and
monks right the grand narrative is the
unification of East and West digital
into one story and that story only has
one effect of interest and that is to
avoid major terrorists avoid catastrophe
yeah apocalypse we could say here
exactly so sorry about that so that
means we have to create that narrative
and we then have to buy with that
nurtures it also and they we have to
implement it and I I definitely I say
with certainty that this is absolutely
impossible if you don't know how could
the machines so just like the curators
are using algorithms to guide us through
the chaos and find ordering chaos and
that's exactly the next thing is the
priests are then trying to find
direction for us okay the next from
order is a direction where machines are
just although I said use machines and
because of the machines and blockchains
we can out train thousands of strangers
different culture
pronounced and from different silos if
you like they start trusting each other
so the machines are gonna create a kind
of exponential educational movement or
are they already are is that what you're
sort of saying it's not I don't think I
don't think you need education to do
trade you you need a patient well I mean
it terms of people getting getting
getting less ignorant or less provincial
or less you know listen no no no you
just don't think humans are gonna do it
I think that's impossible
they will stay provincial okay human
beings are gonna stay okay yeah they've
always been in trouble it'll always fold
them into believing they can trust the
clan and we knew that whatever it's tube
day is they took they'd be they live in
a more unknown world they live in a more
terrified world they would live in a
world of more criminality and and and
having to trust were strangers in a more
complex world and finally the literally
huge cities of today with ten or twenty
million people in them and they now live
in a digital wrong with 8 billion people
and they feel more you know frightening
than ever and they're scared they're
terrified
that's exactly we go towards populism
and you know why the old right is
expanding your why the left has
abandoned Markson and the heroic and
gone for identitarian is immoral so
they're all terrified little kids right
that's what people are now and they're
in fertilising enticed by the welfare
state
because your society they're very ill
prepared for what's happening today and
says we have also stopped believing in
the fellows after 1945 and we've become
an extremely effeminate an infant on our
society we the worse prepared for a
society that demands of us to be
risk-taking and demands of us that
there's an infinite demand of a stranger
out there since active man is so ujin
nobody can carry it well except for a
few shams no one's can carry that demand
we need machines to help us do it and
the beauty of life changed new
technologies that we can now create
chains we have to create the stage
technologies but we have very little
time because we're gonna run into like
right into the lobby probably a very
violent age of the next 50 30 years very
cleric the demand for is gonna be
men's from people and they're gonna
scream for any type of order and when
they can't find an authentic fauna
stéfano they go for the okay so in a way
this this you know this means the
development of a few very you know
extraordinary individuals doesn't it I
mean yeah sure priests priests yeah yeah
so we have the priests again we have the
replacement of the former politicians or
the monarchy we could call that the
decorator ship it replaces the monarchy
and and and and and with the monarchy
the politician so the the previous role
of monarchs and politicians is a place
by the decorators and and if they want
to be elected or not they probably
decide for themselves first and I think
democracy's dead so they that's
different like a second leg and the
third leg is the guys who control the
data itself that's where we're we have
today's engineers and the tech giants
and and the big computer cards because
nadis tells to acid by controlling data
you can then control just about
everything else including anything
volume a temperature side okay that's
what Google Maps is doing for you so you
said if democracy is democracy is dead
it is so ready I mean you know you've
read the books we wrote in the Neda
Kratz already nineteen years ago in
Chapter six that within the near future
United States of America was likely to
pick a TV show house as president so we
said Ronald Reagan yeah he was a decent
guy actually who they needed at the time
because at least he was a union you know
union activist more than he was a movie
star but you know it would come to a
point where TV shows would be the most
trusted personality in the in the nation
and then I'll Trump arose in 2016 so and
yes we predicted that but that that's
because politics is gone ironic people
now literally elect a leader for the
drama that leader is caused because in
all Trump needs to do is if he manages
to position himself as
anti-establishment again even though
he's been disturbed powerful yeah he's
gonna win
he's one method robbed the human drama
and the human drama is always like let's
build a wall that's that's an exciting
drama right anybody contestant wins from
now on because politics has gone ironic
and if you haven't understood politics
is my Roenick it's dead
it's falling apart it's causing havoc
yes you're right I trade tariffs and you
can you can shop the markets with
politics especially in the old
capitalist market you can't really shock
the online world that way because the
algorithms are not changing went from
Rexha trade tariffs all the only the
capitalist markets are shaking so he's
only affecting the system he comes from
he's not affecting the new power
structure every time don't Trump you
know shakes his leg on Twitter actually
Twitter and everything else in the
online world benefits from his behavior
meaning that the new establishment now
which is much more Silicon Valley than
its Washington DC and it's probably the
left to look about he moved out of the
United States because it doesn't even
want to be in United States any longer
this is Stan autocracy okay this is the
new poly do we wrote about 20 years ago
it's not materializing analyzing for the
same reasons that the previous paradigms
also materialized if you change the
fundamental ways human beings
communicate with each other and if you
then also enable for more people to be
part of that communication and then if
you also store information differently
and if this K store much more
information than you did in the past
basically you store everything that
happens you know that is very very
different from the Napoleonic society
where everybody could at least read
write and count but it only did so it
printed books and newspaper it's
nautical videos no the internet world is
very different from that number one
everybody has a voice there oops
so everybody's screaming at the top of
their lungs it's no longer broadcast
huge confuse books nest with eight
billion cuckoos all screaming okay whoo
Winston
none of the guys to scream they're all
losers the winners are the people who
just retract the Simon criticism you
retract from it all
you don't take part in the revolution
because the revolution is only t-shirt
anyway it's nothing more than no you're
a trap you see the things from afar and
then you focus instead on deep studies
and telling the truth because you
realize the screaming will soon be over
and done with
and once the screaming is over done with
it was implosion isn't it I think I'm
learning the the bird vocabulary that
might be an implication what
implementation excuse me exactly that's
one of our most important concept it was
mentioned already in implication is
already there that's across we use again
digital libido I'm gonna dig further
into it employ Taoiseach means if you
got a value in front of you instead of
exploiting it like you did during
calculus which basically plunder it for
once worth in the maximizes value okay
but I'm gonna take a more long-term
sustainable view and I'm gonna keep this
valuable thing to myself or my small
subculture because the tension of that
is way higher than the capitalist value
that I can walk out of this otherwise
and because the Tesla's in no beats
captain we're not pushing the ads from a
Google search we're actually pushing the
algorithm suggestions and the algorithm
is getting clever and clever every day
more intelligent that's machine
intelligence you know meaning that we
can around the algorithm the algorithm
will increasingly point towards the
highest quality in the world and we will
have the winner-takes-all society where
the guy is the number one according to
algorithm is the note we credibly
powerful and profitable and everything
else you're looking for by employed team
Evalia
not exploiting it just takes one more
level of thinking to employed something
instead of exploiting the Facebook got
all the data from billions of users what
do they do they package it and sold it
off the cameras on analytical a bunch of
sociopaths in the UK okay they were
discovered people got upset with him and
they sit there and they're scratching
their heads
in their American autistic arrogance
which is the cultural Facebook and
wondering what happened
well you idiots what do you think would
happen when people find out what you
deal with their data
now instead if you'd packaged date in a
way and prepared yourself for the day in
a transparent world which is what
digital is you prepare yourself for the
day when people would know you would
actually extract some kind of value out
of this data by de personalizing it and
then giving people something in return
for giving you the data instead of
selling it off to make a profit if
they'd done that they would have thought
of the data with an employer to tea
rather than an exploitative mindset so
you cannot combine the internet with
brute capitalism it's impossible because
you're gonna get killed by the
algorithms meaning now if you put in the
algorithm you say trusted with my data
Facebook is not even gonna be in the top
ten they're not gonna be there at all
yeah so the trust economy right it's a
trust economy it's called the tenth
Museum it's an economy that's all about
credibility and awareness and if it's
not credible in awareness well the money
won't come your way please know that its
credibility multiplied with awareness
that's how you build a proper algorithm
and if Google and Facebook can't build
proper algorithms somebody else is
guaranteed to do exactly that so if
these American tech giants and these
Chinese tech giants to have the big date
you know have all the data currently if
they don't build search engines that we
can trust and if you start manipulate
their search engines the search term
which is organized life starts to pay
off right if they meet the ad with the
algorithm if they start doing that if
the mix of potentials with capitalism
they'd get so let's see what face that's
what they're doing now isn't it I mean
that's what Facebook feels like doesn't
it it feels like it feels like a mix of
grotesque marketing with you know
conversation what we do except a mix if
it's transparent that's not a problem we
accept their ads from the Google page we
know the ads are from the desperate guys
didn't make it interprets these videos
yat-zar there we accepted there because
we google search for free see we do see
that from television if I don't pay for
the service then I got it seasoned damn
ads and these in this case I don't even
have to see yeah just see a little you
know a little warning sign to the right
something to much you know I don't know
Google make some money they think used
to develop regular services for me now
Google have sold for Berkeley's
communicated this prevalent now if
friction I get paid either huge amounts
of money to do my work as a philosopher
so I make quite a lot of money no I
don't hide that I also say when we speak
on zoom and maybe somebody cares about
that and I write nonprofit books and I
can even give my books away because I
want the books that we also there is to
be nonprofit projects I can afford them
in profit projects and people love them
because they're nonprofit but they also
know that I made money doing other
things
camera corporation we need a philosopher
to deeply understand why they're in the
mess okay they pay me for that now I
tell people no that's transparency and
honesty and we don't have a problem with
transparency and honesty at all as you
would live in increasingly trust by the
world and it will be totally transparent
in this is that everything we've done in
our lives will come back to haunt us
anyway
because digital remembers everything so
we might as well be brutally honest from
now on that's my first advice to anybody
because they stay with the fact an
honest with everything you do but also
point out that you need to make a living
to survive because you need to buy food
on the table and pay rent
yeah that's okay just tell people when I
said this because I got paid for it yeah
and I said this I mean it well you know
it's like I was thinking the most of the
work that I do these days is is unpaid
right it's just absolutely unpaid you
know and people love you for it
so now we know what employ tation is so
what else did you find out from reading
the factory cutter with you where you've
been so far and I can play jump ring
society well you know I'm still
digesting but I you don't have questions
right you talked about trans rationalism
you know and and yeah versus rationalism
anti-russian ilysm you know in my little
book that I sent you it was really an
attack on
rationalism so what is trans rationalism
and why is that important
GWF Hegel German philosopher wrote on
the six folks early 9th century the
giant so we owe everything to Hegel
without Hegel there's no Freud without
handle this Nietzsche we don't haggle
then there's another compartment is
Amanda Whitehead certain so we know
everything table but if there is a he
deal me in terms of hating himself
doesn't use he would be transnationalism
you know you heard about Hegel's ideal
the absolute mmm-hmm okay so he's often
accused sometimes even by me when I was
younger I kissed Hegel being a total
Asst meaning that he he'd sort he
reached the end of history and he
understood absolutely everything okay
but what Hegel actually means with that
is that he's understood how things work
and how you reach certain conclusions
and that's how for example if you
understand our narratives are always
created you understand for example the
narratives or pathos or mythos of logos
he's always been like that I always be
like as long as were you okay did you
reach the absolute according to her so
Hegel said that he reached absolute and
he claimed that the nation state which
is basically dishonored his friend whom
Bolton started implementing it in
Prussia image in 1808 so you know the
Megillah nation state is the nation
state it's about two hundred years old
so higgledy perfect something he did
certainly do very priestly work in the
sense that he created a nation built on
a shared language and that came out of
the translations of the Bible in Europe
she translated the Bible from great
Hebrew and Latin to the different local
tanks of European vented languages like
an over dialect became German absurdum
Swedish Oxford English Perry started
became French etc so we got all the
different natural tongues Europe these
tungsten became the foundations for the
different nation states of Europe if you
shared the same language and even read
the same newspaper listen to the same
radio station and watch the same TV
shows at night you share a nationality
you're part of the same discourse so
this is a curious media relations thing
and in a sense
he had reached an absolute because what
we're doing today we're working on the
global Empire and the possibility of
creating an entity that is shared by all
humanity without being too blind and too
boring if that's gonna happen we need
the machines to do it
we're still working about a Higgy
environment we're only repeating what he
already did so what is the genius then
of Hegel's absolute and the concept
well it has to do with the fact that he
who understands the limitations of his
own rationality so within your
rationalism understand how far your
rationalism can take you yeah I
understand what you must leave to the
unknown which cannot be comprehended by
you even because he lacks the
information and you don't want to guess
what me or because is simply outside
possibilities compounded you cannot
Remy's so for example you you can't lick
your own asshole anybody work kalique
your ass will accept you that's an
absolute limit okay well it makes us
humble doesn't it right it should make
you humble the fact everybody colliculus
want to accept you so you know there's
some limit to your rationalism and to
understand that limit without thinking
like a model Conti the rationalism
doesn't have a limit where every got
that idea
know there is a limit or far you can
think
but once you've reached a limit so far
you can think you reach your absolute
meaning you cannot get any further okay
mm-hmm so old you do then you should go
back to that absolutely Platinum is how
I thought about so that that's
interesting I thought of it as being
like God or something yeah well he's a
child listen you know all the way
critical loving the medic rats
I probably then have to sort of balance
that up in the next book the writing but
by honoring you we do celebrate them all
over the place the restaurant looks like
so she's a girly but you know Higgins
absolute ass to be understood as a trans
nationalist concept so the work
transaction was not invented by us I
know other philosophers you
you don't know we used it first you
could probably check that if you like
but we'll use him while amylose
explained we use this terms it's part of
our philosophy because I think it's very
very important that we see philosophers
set out these are the limits within
which we can work well we can guarantee
you is that our limits are way wider and
our territory way bigger than anything
science or anybody else does because if
somebody else is a bigger territory to
exploit you comprehend more than we do
then we bow to them were no longer
philosophers because then they become
the philosophers because the guy who
understands the biggest possible
perspective any given time that's the
philosopher
this is Hegel's concept on philosophy
and I hope you subscribe to it and he
inherited it from Aristotle so the great
Aristotelian of our times is Hegel and
knows everything turns toddler that's we
have to go back to our starting to find
path onto Hegel and a radical modernism
and from Hegel then on is what we have
inherited now and I will say Western
philosophy after Hegel it's a very very
different ballgame from the
judeo-christian Europe we used to live
in before that mmm-hmm that was trans
rationalism the most Hegelian term that
Hegel never used okay next one Nate Neil
ISM that's the next one and you now in
it now this game I say Neil ISM you see
you said there were three stages of
nihilism you had you define I don't know
I yell ISM but it could be nihilism
actually not nihilism okay we divide now
listening to three different categories
and have to go to stood the way this
again is what nature should written but
didn't write so we're going to needs
cause of nihilism and we discover you
for them put them into a modern current
environment the digital society we live
in today we discover that there are
three different steps in Ireland the
first one is naive nihilism second one
is cynical nihilism and the third one is
affirmative that's okay what are they
first between these three
99 Lissa misted for example we take the
question of the existence of God okay
naive nihilist doesn't know that God
does not exist
yet he doesn't know he subconsciously
knows that God doesn't exist but he
thinks still believes in God this is a
person who would answer the question do
you believe in God yes I do
and then proudly ask but what kind of
God is that he probably not have an
answer he just probably says it because
it sounds nice and he is so a religious
person is just kind of going through the
motions but doesn't have any genuine
intelligent connection to exactly if you
believe in God you should probably have
an idea what you believe in right do you
agree that you probably believe in a
certain God I believe in the virgin
birth somebody in the resurrection
returned one day and I and yeah Chris
pure naive nihilists you do not believe
in that God and you're always exposed to
somebody asked if you believe that God
exists you believe that God exists so
next one I nihilism is you say that you
believe in God probably because sounds
good because you're a beautiful salt
okay it turns out when I asked what kind
of already believe him then you have no
idea God is I said well if you believe
in God that's quite an important thing
right so you should have some kind of
concept of what God is and you don't
care and since you don't care you
probably don't believe in God at all and
then you guys will probably look a bit
confused no I believe in God I believe
in God being very afraid of leaving that
position so that's not Unitas their
world is full of it I would say most of
the people who practice dead religion
which is the most common form of
religion today or now you've noticed
meaning they go to temples and they pray
to a god with blue elephant or something
but they're just going through the
motions and go through the motions and
the drink are the drinks you're supposed
to drink in the drink so longer contain
the psychedelic substances
happens we just drink it because you
drink it so you just go through em to
rituals and it's dead religion now the
vast video really didn't practice in the
world today is that religion yeah okay
that's not ISM the second one is cynical
nihilism you are aware of the fact you
no longer believe in God you probably
tell your spouse or close friends you go
to church at 11 o clock on ascending
because you're a beautiful soul so you
go to church on Sunday because it looks
good to go in church you might even have
the pina that it's important that we
still pretend that God exists even if we
don't believe in it because if we don't
pretend that God exists and all have a
will I call it the Bill and Hillary
Clinton version of Christianity very
adamant
no I am be religious and I go to church
and I believe in God and they put their
hand on the Bible whenever they can to
swear all cynical nineties is prevalent
in our culture and it's actually a lot
worse than I listen to the sense that
the cynical night is actually our only
pretending to believe in God um I would
say values are then inter subjective
meaning that they occur between people
usually within a tribe and then
concerned with the survival of the tribe
and the domestication of else within the
tribe to serve the tribe that's how most
values are crazy
so yeah cynical nihilism is that you're
pretending you believe in God which
actually are aware of the fact you
you're not meeting rights it's a very
America it's a kind of schizophrenic
religion too isn't it yes to it but I
would say most cynical nihilist I'm
perfectly aware of the fact that it's
just very career-minded okay so they go
to the charity galas and they get money
and they pray to God with open eyes
while everybody else is they don't
really care too much about religion
because god is dead to them because god
is dead god is gone you can no longer be
trusted and because there's no God there
that means the least whole field open
then and their pursuits or whatever they
were looking for so they go for their
own guys and desires and they're not
afraid of being corrupt
because they're obviously saying one
thing and mean something very different
so hopefully way they arrival algorithms
and we did till now memorizing
everything we can expose the Cenacle -
more and more so you know it could be a
good thing for people who actually are
serious about friends because to me it's
just no good there's no good at all the
corrupt society I think anytime we have
people in the public of the see one
thing and then do something different
that is the fundament direction that is
corruption we yes and I don't think they
should be trusted I don't think any
American politician who put chances to
believe in God when they don't should be
trust it why would they be trusted when
they bought something as fundamental as
religion cynical - poison definitely a
poison yeah well Nietzsche 8c to certain
woods you know the great thinkers of the
19th century warned us about it okay the
third one is the one in each of loves
and celebrates it's called how many
miles sorrows
oh god is dead Wow great if god is dead
then we can one day mean the gods or at
least we can create our own value
straight on value is defining yeah we
create our own values identify with
those knives
Nietzsche called discidium become gods
we can become governments or yes because
the permit of nihilism counts Khalsa
comes an ethic of responsibility which
Nietzsche inherits from my favorite
religion zoroastrianism this is exactly
why they're aware of each character
addictiveness because he wrote in a
gentleman later the morality begins and
ends with roster the guy who figured out
of morality works or ethics is was so
rostrum that's what religion of ethics
and because Nietzsche was a professor of
philology and not philosophy he was very
skilled and just he spoke fluent ancient
Persian it was a fad in turn in the 19th
century both Hegel and Nietzsche
read the original text was restaurant
and they understood the religious
restaurant and so they're just what it
was about and in terrestre foresters
very adamant
with that you become your axe he was
very ethical so a stern ethic says that
no no no wait a second you can't just
make up any value from out of nowhere
see they all look this room because your
values will collide without human beings
values and at the end of the day you're
gonna collaborate with other human
beings and at the end of the day you're
gonna have to try to find some kind of
purpose in your life something higher
than yourself otherwise you just have
all the little child but that's a
contradiction of Nietzsche's know Greece
with this if you really need to carry
Greece with this he then exposes that
idea and develops it further in our
sprach zarathustra and what he says he
says is that you become what you say you
become with you but how would you think
you become what you say you have a
thought that thought results in a Turing
a word that word results in an act that
act in turn influences how you think the
next day it's loop that loop wellmy chip
uses that term for several different
things but the term return of the same
is one of the he uses that term for that
loop meaning is also the point with
ethics so ethics is also subject to the
eternal return of the same meaning that
you become your thoughts you become your
words you become your actions to
yourself you cannot escape that you
identify with your own history you can
lie about your history to other people
you can lie about your beliefs okay lie
about just about everything about
yourself you cannot lie to yourself so
you can't ask a so you can't escape
until that's a shallow shallow morality
which is uncle you can not to yourself I
mean so haunt you and that means that
you can only do Essex to yourself
this is Nietzsche's aristocrat this is
cirrhosis it can't be a cynical a
cynical nihilist
if you're truly ethical no you can't
no absolutely not you cannot do
doublespeak to yourself you can joke
with speak to others at the end of the
day the question is why would you do
that so this is neat to just affirmative
nihilism and his pure form is that yeah
we are free but freedom comes
curse okay that's not neat interesting
here and and he basically resurrect its
arrestor you find the same thing as a
restroom isn't that's exactly what's or
a stern ism doesn't have any monks or
nuns because we're all monks and
nonsense okay I'm a little bit lost
about the curse can you explain why
freedom comes as a curse well you cannot
escape or destiny
you cannot escape your genes you cannot
escape your personality type you cannot
escape your body but that's that's not
freedom go so determination on you
cannot control it's a lot of shit going
on you cannot control your submitted to
the freedom is very limited but you've
free from God