[Music]
hello and welcome I am glad to bring you
another episode and look forward to
doing so more regularly as I figure out
how to do that there's a difficulty in
getting the right people particularly in
person based as I am here in Australia
what I've found is that when there are
international authors and speakers of
interest on tour their time is very
limited and generally more mainstream
appearances are preferred so I'm
considering more seriously having
conversations over Skype or what have
you
though this isn't what I'd prefer and I
think for the kinds of conversations I'm
looking to have a task is made all the
more difficult without truly being able
to look someone in the eyes and Express
with the body but regardless of this I
am as committed as ever to building a
forum for meaningful conversations about
important ideas of individual and
civilization or significance I had the
highest aspirations for this project I
can conceive and there are many moving
parts to get right perhaps you're tuning
in to get to the content immediately so
I'll have to ask for your patience for
just a few minutes as I haven't spoken
directly to listeners in what feels like
some time I'd like to tell you about
some of the things I'm doing some other
podcasts I'd like to recommend and
recurrent meet-up events I'll be hosting
first and recently I've been writing
about meaning and about navigating the
experiential landscape of what you might
call liminal consciousness a
consciousness relaxed or dissolved of
its ordinary paradigms of secured or
ordered relation to the world the
relationship if you like between the
known and unknown this has been a
central interest for the better part of
six years or so though I have been
interested in meaning or the sometimes
felt apparent lack thereof since I was a
boy I think this is something that
really we all involve ourselves with to
some degree perhaps what differentiates
our individual approach to meaning is
the degree of attention we are willing
and perhaps courageous enough to put
towards it
courageous might be harsh there it's not
easy to confront the realities of life
but courage is required anyway I have
also been writing about nitrous oxide as
an exemplar of the dissolution of
ordinary consciousness and it's
mysterious feeling of mystical insight
into the truth of all being I've been
trying to see if I can add anything to
the insights made by William James more
than a century ago so far I suspect not
though I will put something out in due
time which I hope will be an enjoyable
read our Sempra lemonades of this
writing to the mailing list long before
I published somewhere so make sure you
sign up to that on the website and on
that note I welcome any e-mails back
from readers interested in sharing their
thoughts or pointing out mistakes or
areas that lack clarity I read all the
emails sent to me and reply to everyone
I've also been writing about The Voice
Club project and the philosophy that
underlies it and I'm closer to a more
formal presentation of this philosophy
than I have been previously rather than
delve into the philosophy now let me
instead just clarify my aims I am we are
creating a forum and community built to
platform meaningful conversations about
matters of individual and civilizational
importance meaningful in as profound a
manner as can be achieved about ideas
practices and issues most critical to
adaptive sense-making in the modern
world this is and will require continued
innovation space support and alignment
across numerous individuals with varied
skill sets the forum I have
crystallizing an image requires a host
of embodied experience all art forms and
practices
it requires method as yet no mastered
anywhere as far as I can tell the reason
this is so critical is that as
individuals and as citizens of an
evolving world we require a meaningful
authentic creative dialogue capable of
advancing the sense we make of the world
the sense we make must connect with our
capacity for rational Theory making and
the reality of our embodied spirituality
we must bring the knowing how there was
it feels like but what it's like to be
in relationship with into harmony in
with our sense-making about what the
world consists of from a more
traditional scientific empirical
propositional belief forming perspective
this project must live
however by providing unique value to you
each step of the way and so it's my
ambition to host public facing
conversations is simply the focal point
of a broader gathering of individuals
who will participate in their own
conversations this will be the
facilitation of a forum for you to
participate in your own meaning making
the standards will be set high the upper
limit of what's possible is not clear
but it is interesting it's very
interesting finally I'd like to
recommend some other podcasts and
channels I have tremendous respect for
firstly rebel wisdom based in London and
best watched on YouTube
our releasing in my humble opinion
Bangor after Bangor quality interviews
with rebellious thinkers making waves in
the current zeitgeist second a podcast I
recently discovered named the
intellectual explorers club based in
Toronto
both rebel wisdom and the intellectual
Explorers Club hold events that can be
attended so I recommend checking them
out if you're London or Toronto based
another excellent podcast is the future
thinkers podcast finally I recommend the
currently in released lecture series by
John Bevere key cognitive scientist at
the University of Toronto I think I
mentioned him also in the podcast you're
about to listen to I've organized the
call spot for about 60 people to watch
these lectures with me on a weekly basis
in Melbourne and to discuss them
afterwards the lecture series is titled
awakening from the meaning crisis now
that's about that thank you for staying
with me to the episode then recorded in
early February this year in front of a
live audience
I'm joined by the very interesting
Melissa Warner executive officer of my
medicine Australia a graduate of
neuroscience and accomplished meditator
and careful Shepherd of altered states
of consciousness and psychedelic
medicines you will hear about mine
medicine Australia from Melissa shortly
and you may have encountered her before
in previous episodes of voice Club I
recommend you check out her conversation
with Rick Doblin once you are all done
here
okay thank you for staying with me
19 amigos
[Music]
alright Melissa what we buddy doing here
this is a podcast and a trying to figure
out still if it's a conversation or how
it all works when there's an audience
involved because something that is so
important is to be flowing with each
other when you converse but it's not
just about us it's about everybody here
and I don't know exactly how to work
that out other than to sort of do it and
see how it goes so Melissa thank you for
doing this with me thank you Tim for
organizing it getting everyone to come
along and thanks everyone for being here
yeah yeah it's been something in the
works for a little while I think given
we will be talking about psychedelics as
the fulcrum of what this whole
conversation it's worth noting to begin
with that neither myself voice Club
shifties and I think I'm correct in
speaking for Melissa and mine medicine
Australia as well
none of us support the use of illegal
substances we're here to have a mature
conversation about the scientific
research into these substances and a
conversation about how as individuals
and society we should relate to these
substances but it's not an advocacy for
use of any illegal substances okay
so that side my name is Tim my
background is in philosophy but I'm
interested in many different things I'm
interested in psychedelics because
they're very interesting and Melissa is
joining me for this conversation today
and Melissa I don't think I can
introduce you as well as you can
introduce yourself so if you like
perhaps introduce yourself hi everyone
I'm Melissa Juana and I'm the executive
officer of my medicine Australia and new
charity created to create a pathway
forward which
transformative therapies including
psychedelics regulatory approved and
research fact psychedelic therapy in
Australia along with that and also on
the management committee of prism or
cyclic research and science and medicine
and you may have heard in the news
recently that prism do have their first
trial with psilocybin it's in Vince's
hospital treating end-of-life anxiety
which is really exciting and a fruition
of a about 10 years trying to create the
change in the awareness in the medical
community to allow this to happen mm-hmm
yes it's a big old project first of all
are we audible for everyone in the room
the guys at the back can you give me a
bit louder okay Melissa make sure you
speak right into that mic and Derek or
Tommy or some could we have Tommy do you
mind shutting that door thank you
all right that should be well that's an
even louder on my part and Melissa I
think that should be good ask the
question to the audience sure I just
want to know who here knows someone who
suffers from mental illness sorry
everybody well that's does anyone know
someone who has benefited from
psychedelics with a mental health ok I
just wanted to see the numbers there
that looked about 80% or there's about
about 50 people in this room or
something like that maybe which is quite
interesting also and you're not on
camera but um who has taken psychedelics
here right so all that almost everyone
well that's that's good to know who
understands psychedelics well there's a
couple brave hands I definitely can't
raise mine although I'm interested in
the process of inquiry cool
okay well Melissa I am wondering the
right way to begin this because you are
a fascinating person and someone who I'm
so glad has come into my life I really
enjoyed getting to know you and what
you're doing in the world
that can't be fully separated from your
life and your experiences and so in the
first part of this conversation I'd like
us to get to Brod places one of them is
to cover what we can say about what the
the latest in psychedelic science can
tell us about the efficacy of
psychedelic assisted therapies and
perhaps a little bit about the
implications for understanding the brain
but I also want to get closer to why it
is that you find yourself so impassioned
to move this forward in Australia so
where do you think the right place to
begin is maybe I'll start with a little
bit on psychedelics and get into my
personal journey a bit after that okay I
guess it goes back to my first question
to the audience which was how many
people know someone with mental illness
and I was expecting it to be everybody
because 45 percent of Australians
currently well will experience mental
illness that in their lifetime and one
in five currently suffering from a
mental illness feels pretty staggering I
think it's 30 percent of men and 40
percent of women will experience
depression at some point in their lives
so it's not the person sitting next to
you it's you sir it's quiet affecting
yes and there's many different ways to I
mean how do you even one of the toughest
things and I can speak to depression a
little bit there's a feeling of a lack
of a lack of options like there's a
diminishment of your own agency and
there's also at least in my case a lack
of connection to something worth moving
towards and now in an interesting way
something worth moving towards often
takes its roots in something within
there's an ember of life that you carry
and are in relationship to that I think
projects itself out into the world and
so you kind of whose connect
into that and then you lose connection
to what that needs to be and how you
need to manifest that in the world and
then on top of that you lose a kind of
sense of options and you also lose an
agency to act this is very true and
you're going about it from a very
psychological and philosophical
viewpoint an experiential viewpoint
which isn't really the viewpoint of
current treatment which is also a
chemical bath of the brain or well we
have this hypothesis of increasing
serotonin for depression or needing to
increase gather the more relaxing
neurotransmitter through anxiety but
that is not necessarily all it takes
right there is a person and there is a
story Christ so we find with traditional
therapies is that they do work in some
people it's not too much for the placebo
they do work in some people but when you
withdraw them generally that person
relapses and also there's a whole host
of side effects with regular medications
and you have to take them every single
day I think one of the most striking
things about psychedelic therapy is in
the trials after just one or two doses
of psilocybin people experience a relief
of their depression that lasts up to all
so far we've had follow-ups for three
months six months and a year yeah we've
seen quite a remarkable amount of study
in the last 10 to 15 years into
substances like psilocybin MDMA also
ketamine ibogaine to a lesser extent
although that's also something that's
proved very efficacious for addiction
right right so yeah these different
substances seem to have different niches
of effect for across really a range of
conditions from addiction to depression
to PTSD also some stuff on OCD as well
which is quite peculiar because OCD is
really strange as is it it's a kind of
cognitive rigidity right yes yeah well I
think everything's strange so
everything is both curious a normal
stranger and strange it's the nature of
the world I think a pattern in
depression anxiety in
obsessive-compulsive disorder is a
cognitive restriction a inflexibility of
the mind a patterned way of behaving yes
and this goes back to Tim's first
comment about the person and trajectory
and well if you were if you were born to
a family where there was domestic abuse
if you experienced a trauma growing up
if you were a soldier on the frontlines
of war the thing with the brain is it's
a wonderful learning machine but the
imprints of our experience live on for
our neuronal connections so storylines
propagate that's why we see survivors of
childhood trauma fulfilling the same old
story lines whether it be domestic abuse
entering domestic entering violent or
abusive relationships repetitively
because that's what their brain was set
up to attach to to relate to to feel
familiar with so it comes down to
changing our storylines had early change
and adapt I more consciously choose who
we want to be right I feel that that is
the opportunity and the great
therapeutic power behind psychedelics
they're shown to increase cognitive
flexibility and we see in brain studies
brain imaging using fMRI we see an area
the brain called the default mode
Network issues along the midline which
is correlated to our rumination our
sense of self our storyline we find it
active when people are daydreaming or
thinking about the short-term future
chop them past we find disintegration
within this neuro with this network
right so when the psychedelic experience
kicks in acutely yes what were the
digression so I know these studies
largely come out of Imperial College
London is that right for the ones that
show the increased intra entropic state
of the brain that's right right
and what was they were they using
psilocybin or LSA well they've used LSD
and psilocybin was your memorized
studies okay okay so to synthesize that
is it if I'm i right in saying something
like psilocybin and LSD certain
thresholds create a state of entropy in
the brain at the diminishment of is that
word diminishment the diminishment of
the default mode Network which to
understand it from an experiential point
of view is it's kind of like a removal
of the the rigidity that you yourself
move through the world and experience
the world with so it could be perhaps or
underpins this opportunity to reevaluate
your self storyline right right so
something that jumps out to me still
saying in the therapeutic realm there is
in a state of increased possibility has
more connections going on there's
something about approaching previous
experiences you've had that are
distinctly negative or traumatic there's
something about approaching those in a
state of more possibility that enables a
resetting of how you store those
experiences they set the right kind of
all your interpretive framework is given
potentially a reset potentially a reset
but we also find that there is not
justice disintegration of the networks
but in the default mode Network and
they're centered usually in the
posterior and anterior cingulate cortex
which is quite close to the limbic
system which you might be aware is an
emotional hotspot of the brain not just
as there is this integration within this
type usually tightly correlated Network
but there's also more communication in
diverse regions of the brain right we
also see a few days or I think even a
day after treatment is actually again an
increase in the correlation in the
default mode Network and this may be
interpreted as a wreak Lera fiying or
redefining period
of integration of what you experienced
at the peak of the psilocybin journey
right that all makes that all make sense
I guess to redefine yourself you have to
lose yourself for a short period yeah
losing at least the the entrenched
nature the entrenched debate storylines
one of the wonderful metaphors that's
used out of from one of the researchers
at Imperial College or of incoherence is
this idea that if you have a mountain
where somebody is skiing from down from
the peaks there are pathways at a quiet
well-worn that are really easy to go
down that allow you to go super fast and
then there are more wine the unknown
pathway so you have to sort of plow
through and go more slowly less
well-read psychedelics allow these less
well-read pathways to become easier so
those habitual learnt ways of being as
restrictive you can choose an
alternative way well what way should we
choose this is a very very difficult
question and it's one of those questions
that I don't know if there's like a
generic answer can only get you so far
and then you start talking about
philosophy quite quickly because we all
have individual lives and while there
are in an important way like deep
patterns that we all have within us are
in relation to and we share those how
they actually manifest out in all our
individual lives are quite different so
here then we get to a point where maybe
we can talk about why I'm interested to
know how you would tell me now how have
psychedelics been of benefit to you I
guess that first of all they were the
concept the psychedelic was inspiring to
me and I guess I came across them in a
not not the most typical way it was
actually in my first
Kloss - psychology Velma Nene in my
studies in actually the whole that will
be having a launch of my medicine
Australia right next week with David not
who is the researcher behind the
Imperial trials and that very same
lecture hall was the first place I heard
about psychedelics and it was through a
recommended reading by the lecturer this
lecturer would put music and
visualizations as you entered the
lecture hall which at 9:00 a.m. on a
Monday morning and your first semester
of university was it was a really nice
treat for getting out of bed so early
and yeah but that was his character and
then he would proceed with the lecture
and one of the recommended readings was
out as Huxley's the doors of perception
as anyone read yep who's read the doors
a couple reluctant hands yeah there's a
few more so doors of perception were was
written by Aldous Huxley after his first
experience with mescaline one of the
psychedelic compounds started from
peyote and he described in this book
mescaline to be of an artist stroke or
chemical he also said that psychedelics
and the experience was of the plane of
art and a perpetual creation and that
one day they may serve to heal mental
illness and at the time I was caught
between the crossroads of wanting to be
a visual artist but quite attracted to
philosophy and science and here was this
field this chemical this medicine we can
say that now the back then it was less
clear this medicine they had the
potential to connect one both to art
meaning and also heal and I was
spellbound by this interesting word I
hadn't heard before I was Huxley
actually was involved in the naming of
psychedelics we the psychiatrist
Humphry Osmond they were Caron they were
corresponding
their experiences and these early days
of discovery and Afra also and rota
a little short poem something along the
lines of drew fall inhale or rise
angelic just take a pinch of psychedelic
and that's the name was chosen and this
strange new word did inspire me I
transferred from arts to science
decidedly to study neuroscience and
somehow become a psychedelic research
even though there was no such field in
Australia and there were few studies
well there actually were quite another
but there were a few universities that
had cyclic research programs so I was
frequently told this was quite the
aspirational if not absurd dream where
it was brave enough to share it with
somebody but I went on and I loved
nearest science I loved learning about
the undercurrents the biochemical
undercurrents of consciousness of close
as we can get anyway because there's
such a gap there obviously with the hard
problem and easy problem consciousness
is to science and your correlates versus
the experience but I love this field and
I had an aspiration of being a doctor so
I was doing all the all the correct
subjects study the gam Sat and
unfortunately in my last semester of uni
I had a traumatic experience occur which
was quite a shock to my system and I
went from being a high-performing
student to someone who could me really
leave the house and I dropped out at
University and I had been a
goody-two-shoes most of my life
and I had not really known anyone even
though I was tempted I was aware of the
illegal status I was aware of the
potential of risk of and not knowing
where the substance came from so I
hadn't even though I was intellectually
inspired I had to take in psychedelics
until this point where I experienced
this trauma
and I was able to receive some guidance
from overseas because there are places
where psychedelics are legal and where
true and where Sarah P is supported and
[Music]
after those profound meetings with these
long researched substances medicines I
was able to return to my degree and
completed and that really solidified my
dream to be involved in the in the the
growth of the knowledge and the
understanding of these substances so we
can create programs of therapeutic
benefit for everyone who needs them the
benefit from them mmm well it's a it's a
beautiful story and I know there's an
awful lot more to it I am tempted to
share a story of my own my story is a
lot my my story involved going
to well actually the story probably
started when when my parents stood up
and I moved to Australia as like a posh
English kid at 11 but I'm into
semi-rural Brisbane but then at 17 I
went travelling with my best mate at the
time and we went to Amsterdam and we
bought Fogg loads of truffles and we
took them it was a very strange
experience it's not ideal to take
psychedelics in a place where you're in
some physical danger we were in the
red-light district and we were in an
alley people were walking past and
trying to sell us more things in various
animated ways I remember clinging on to
wherever I could around me because my
sense of reality was being utterly
destroyed this was an interesting
experience and is one that I think many
people can relate to when they come to
psychedelics because as much as there is
great potential for benefit and we know
this this is essentially established
fact that psychedelics are efficacious
tools for the treatment of various
mental afflictions but they are a
powerful tool that needs to be handled
with care and with maturity this brings
us I think neatly to the concepts of set
and setting now I know that as we saw
from the hands before a lot of people
here are familiar with psychedelics and
so you know I don't want to be sort of
banal in talking about some things that
maybe many of you already feel like you
know quite well but the thing is certain
setting are really quite deep concepts
actually when you consider what they
mean because life is very strange and
the context we live in is also well very
strange and constantly of our own making
we're involved in how we show up and we
also come from a long lineage of culture
and evolutionary processes which show us
various settings that are helpful or not
so with that vague kind of introduction
there Melissa can you tell me what set
and setting are from at least how
they're understood from us from a
scientific perspective definitely and I
want to restate there was really
interesting Journal article that came
out I think last year from again from
the imperial college team and the title
was psychedelics the importance of
context because certain setting really
is key set being the mental mindset you
come to with the experience your
expectations the preparation work the
story what you want out of the
experience and setting being the
environment was one thing that is true
about psychedelics as they increase your
receptivity to the environment your
receptivity yeah which is which is one
of the ways they facilitate change and
this is your internal environment your
set and your external environment the
setting your flexibility and your and a
newfound way to relook and receive
reinterpret these things is one of the
hallmarks
but because of that in a dangerous or in
a unsafe or anxiety-inducing or maybe
even an aesthetic environment these
features are enhance and your experience
of them is enhanced which is why both
preparation work integration work hosts
the experience and the environment
itself is really important as in trials
I collect therapy occurs in a very
different environment to standard
doctor's office or hospital room it's in
a room that is often full of art comfy
seats and male and female therapists
pair you close your eyes you have your
favorite music on so it's really key to
create an environment that facilitates
the changes you want to see in yourself
right yeah it's very interesting and
crucially an environment that enables
you to attend to your inner life without
fear that the external world or your
sort of baseline physiological concerns
sort of not taken care of is a
problematic environment to say that in a
way that's not so convoluted you've got
to have your sorted out about you
to engage with your experience mmm I
think Tim's experience with trying
truffles in Amsterdam it's a good case
in point of what we don't really want to
have happen in Australia I don't
necessarily think it's wise to have
psilocybin available at do but I I've
been to Amsterdam and it looks like the
equivalent of a 7-eleven mm-hmm I
definitely think that they should be
available for people who want to create
change in their lives which what
transformative experiences where people
move and grow in their existence and
their well-being and talking about
therapy and well-being I think another
point related to certain setting to set
is the work or the positive psychology
field such as if you familiar with the
concepts of flow mm-hmm lowers interest
hello is interesting flow is written by
a psychologist called me hey chick
semi-high and it's quite interesting
when you look at high performers which
he did he study the lives of high
performers creatives and kind of work
backwards and noted what the condition
of their lives what traits they have in
common what were their traits when they
were working psychological traits
environmental traits what was that
certain setting that allowed them to
flourish in the ways that they did and
he observed three key transformative
skills and they are unconscious self
assurance and this is this concept of
feeling like you are connected to
something feeling like there is a
trajectory you can walk and I'll hope
that things can get better and that's
done in preparation work that's done in
your intention setting before a
psychedelic experience so is this like a
belief in your own competence do it
degree and particularly I think in the
context of therapy to heal or to recover
mm-hmm so that without that vision of
the trajectory that we're heading
towards how are we really going to get
there mm-hmm that's a key one so
establishment of goals sounds really
goals like goals that are like
reasonably attainable yes right or even
and or even just a belief that you can
change okay and then there's also an
interconnectedness to the world so not
seeing yourself is separate from the
world noticing it you're part of this
ecosystem a social ecosystem
environmentally kosis tuned and it can
even probably go further than that that
we are if we start speaking the Carl
Sagan sense of same heavens that we were
made from once came from stars that
things are interconnected mm-hmm yeah
human beings are not it's not even a
coherent concept that you can have of
all the human being without
simultaneously like recognizing our
embeddedness in everything I mean if
there are no plants to attend to our
atmosphere then we're in big trouble
there's no separate you it's just the
can't can't be as a thing you have your
own influence in your space but as a
separate fixed thing entirely
conceptually divorced it's like that
can't that can't be sustained that there
is links between you and everything else
and awareness so how you are connected
who you're connected to and our
willingness to connect and this Orient
is called this trait an orientation to
the world and it's quite interesting
because psychedelics have been noted to
increase the classic romantic trait
called nature relatedness which is
pretty much an awareness that you are
connected to the world and that it also
would nature related and this week
something you care about the natural
world and it gives you enjoyment
psychedelics tend to increase this this
sense of connection to the world around
us do they think is a really interesting
point this correlation between these
transformative skills and what
psychedelics do encourage in a person
there's also the third trait is the
observance or the seeking of new
solutions so three transformative skills
are in an orientation towards the world
seeking of new solutions and policing is
the first time again do you remember
guys unconscious self assurance right
that's a really important one yeah the
relationship between flow and
psychedelics is interesting there's
something about the reduction of self
recursive concerns so that you can just
attend and be present with the task at
hand that is crucial to well that is in
a sense being in this in this state of
flow and that's one of the traits of
depression is to be more locked into the
internal dialogue to that voice of
narration that storyline that entrapping
storyline right versus an orientation
choice the world
willingness to let it in so some of you
might be familiar with a guy called
Steven Kotler he wrote a book called the
rise of Superman I think something like
that and stealing fire and stealing fire
with a guy called Jamie wheel is that
correct like these are really
interesting thinkers at the moment they
have a lot of content online i really
suggest checking it out on the topic of
suggesting content there's a cognitive
scientists it's professor at the
university of toronto his name's john
Vevey aki ve r VA e ke and he's at the
moment doing a series where he is
talking about the meaning crisis and
he's talking a lot about flow
psychedelics in there as well I really
recommend checking out too if you want
to I think be present with some of the
most cutting-edge thinking about how to
tie together all of these stuff all of
this stuff that if you treat it
separately you can fill like sometimes a
little mystical or strange it's really
it's really good stuff to check out and
this is a define flow for anyone who's
unsure it said it's also called optimal
experience or when you're so absorbed in
activity that you sort of forget the
daily concerns of the self and you are
one with whatever you're doing which i
think has to a degree a correlation in
phenomenology or experience to peak
experience which is known to be a
healing factor for psychedelics actually
we know that participants who have
greater or higher scores on peak
experience also known as mystical
experience tend to have higher scores of
relaxing all of removing their
depressive outlook there they get there
they're more improved their clinical
outcomes are higher the greater the
experience of a peak experience or
mystical experience and that is feeling
at connecting to the environment and
sensation of insight of all beauty and
wonder I think that's really another
interesting correlation between these
sites so we can learn how to approach
psychedelic experiences both in therapy
and in your lie
through looking at things like positive
psychology and ways of bridging that
vision that we have for ourselves in the
future so speak about the future then at
least like it may be a bit more
concretely now about where we are in
Australia with respect to this current
stay of psychedelic research and the
government's attitude towards it this
now is becoming and will be a key domain
for you moving forwards and I'm
interested to know where where do you
think we are with respect to how much
movement can be made to put some stuff
like put more studies together to figure
out some of this stuff and also where do
you aim to try and get that well I think
it's often we talked about in
psychedelic field that there's this this
Boulder and when is it going to start
moving down the hill
when is the momentum going to kick in I
do think that momentum is starting to
kick in
luckily I'm not sure if everyone is
aware that both MDMA and psilocybin have
been declared breakthrough therapies by
the American FDA or Food and Drug
Administration which is a really
important step because not only will the
FDA be supporting the movement of these
drugs from unknown or illicit to
medicines they provide feedback and
advice more quickly to the group the
research groups achieving these studies
so it's a really exciting step and
something that I feel the research and
regulatory environment in Australia has
listened to and really has to listen to
because as these drugs are reclassified
as medicines overseas of course
Australia will want to have the most
cutting-edge treatments because I feel
that we are ultimately an innovative
country and psychedelics are truly
innovation in mental health treatment
they are next-generation mental health
treatment so that I guess a limiting
factor is still bridging this gap
between a
Kodama conservatism or a lack of
knowledge which is definitely why my
medicine Australia was conceived to
educate and to share and to create a
bridge or nexus between the regulatory
environment academics clinicians and
culture the other really important thing
is funding because and probably the most
difficult part but also a freeing aspect
perhaps about cyclic research is that
Big Pharma is not interested because of
patents on the substances of Lon Lon the
also there's the factor of between 1 and
2 when MDMA 1 2 3 2 2 3 treatments and
you're gonna experience huge increases
in freedom from whatever condition you
were previously imprisoned within so
there's a lack therefore of profit drive
behind psychedelics which means that
MDMA will be a second medicine ever to
be brought to market through
philanthropy the first one being another
society changing discovery ru-486 was
also the first medicine to be brought to
market through philanthropy I hope
psilocybin will be the third right and
so in Australia what are the which are
the substances you're targeting has the
ones to move forward
well the TGA generally wants to see at
least a small proof-of-concept trial
within Australia before they approach
reclassifying substances so that's why
we need to have trials for psilocybin
and for MDMA here before we can expect
reclassification to occur and things are
going to shift when phase 3 results come
out as currently maps the bodies that
have been moving forward with MDMA
therapy for PTSD they've currently just
started their phase 3 trials the
also face two trials - psilocybin going
on worldwide
so as these studies move forward these
large phase 2 and phase threes we will
see some shifts but we do need to be
doing research here to appeal and get
the approval of our regulators and for
that we need funding right so one of the
most challenging things about one of the
most necessary things to do with respect
to moving culture forward in a healthy
way I think is getting the individual
level done right which just means to
have honest conversations with the
people in your lives to be honest with
yourself - which is also very very
difficult and to be able to have you
know an honest conversation about
difficult topics this doesn't happen as
many difficult topics in society right
now psychedelics in lots of ways I think
there's a lot of people on the ground
who recognize that the tides are turning
there are topics in society today that
are also controversial the relationship
between masculinity and femininity as
one I'm looking forward to having some
talks on politics is always difficult
the relationship between religion and
science having these conversations at
the dinner table for many many people is
a difficult thing to do and having
conversations about psychedelics at the
dinner table can be a very difficult
thing to do is vital and it's vital and
a practical thing that helps in that
regard is to be able to differentiate a
psychedelic from other drugs so how
would you a lot of things there's a few
things I want to touch on but bar being
one of the first thing was you mentioned
being honest with yourself I do think
that one of the great things about
psychedelics is they kind of force you
to be honest with yourself right it's
often being said that they sort of put
up a mirror to who you are right now so
there is that aspect I think is really
important idea of self confrontation I
think that's also
one of the reasons people can be a bit
trepidatious or anxious I also because
it's not necessarily a clear mirror
right the message you might get back is
one not you should take with great
importance but it's often not going to
be a message where it's like oh yeah I
got that I can just translate that into
my life immediately it's all very very
clear and the experience of course is
taking place largely imagistic alee and
like I suppose growth and development in
life being honest with yourself is
something that takes time and so the
feedback you get is something that you
have to work with yeah so I'm coming to
a point of responsibility as well going
back to that journal article the
importance of context in psychedelic
experience there was a call out by the
researcher Robin card Harris for the
cyclic community because we are at this
point where that Boulder is signed roll
down the hill we are at this turning
point there is a there is a there is
still a risk that something could go
very wrong in the trial and these
medicines could be delayed or there is a
risk that people become increasingly
concerned about deaths at Rainbow
Serpent which are very rarely if ever
ever caused by a psychedelic any
implicated in the combination of many
drugs but the safety profile
psychedelics is incomparable to really
any other substance so safety profiles
is one core differentiating feature and
there's good information on this I can't
point you in the direction of that right
now I know David not David not David not
who will be here in Melbourne next week
did the famous comparison of the harm of
drugs study for the British government
which he was acting and as the adviser
for drugs to the British government that
point and after which he was fired for
basically telling the truth which was
psilocybin MDMA a fairly harmless and
drugs that we control at society at
least consumes I regularly like alcohol
tabacco were
right on the other end of the scale at
the most dangerous in the same ballpark
as heroin and crack cocaine so that's
that's something we can be aware of that
psychedelics are safe for the body but
as you say responsibility and the mind
and setting so back to that Journal
article there was a call up in Robin
Carhartt Harris for cyclic community for
those of us who are already already
experienced or who will experience or
who are going to take psychedelics I've
often thought about the responsibilities
of the rule breaker I first discovered
it at a passion er well it's probably
not true bad first became truly aware of
it of a passion retreat where I really
wanted to write at the past read oh I'm
not sure if you're aware it's a very
very straight you have to wake up and go
to sleep at certain times eat at certain
times no talking at all no form of
communication you look down at the
ground because well ten days of silence
and I gaze Camille can ricochet in the
mind if you've been quiet for well six
seven days and it would no interaction
so there's you very have to be very
careful with how you affect others and I
really wanted to write you were not
meant to write I really wanted I was
having some really profound thoughts I
thought I might lose them and so I
thought okay well maybe at night time
I'll write my book on covers with Ashley
there's a scratching noise of the pen
Mike might be heard by the girl in bed
over the curtain and maybe that will
confuse her maybe or maybe I wanted
right well person's breaking the rules
what does that mean for me so I ended up
writing in the shower a partner I tell
this story because it made me realize
the responsibility of the rule breaker
and that is if you break rules you
better break them like they didn't need
to be there in the first place
well and on that note then we're going
to conclude the first part of this
evening we started a little late but
we'll still do a 15 20 minute in to me
and then we'll come back where I invite
anyone who wants to to ask a question
and then also I want to experiment with
a forum type component which involves if
any of you guys want to answer a
question then
yeah indicate that and maybe come along
and share something it's that's the sort
of thing that can go disastrously wrong
I suppose and so Melissa and I will like
answer I suppose a fair chunk of them
but if someone does feel like they
really resonate with a particular
question has something to add then I
welcome you to come and share that so
anyway thank you so much for your
attention it means an awful lot for you
to come out and be thank you and thank
you to Melissa all right so what I've
done here is set up a microphone there
and somehow looks off in like us in a
strange I don't think that's
particularly how it should look by it
works and so if you have a question to
ask about anything at all ask it and if
we can't answer it we can't answer it
but if we can we will try so anytime
anybody wants to come up please go ahead
hello spontaneous please anonymity okay
thank you for the chat this this evening
my question is so you were talking
before about the phase 2 and phase 3
studies and how it's looking for the
future but I'd like to know less less
science more your opinion when do you
think well the day will come that people
can actually go to a trained
psychotherapist and have access to
psilocybin or MDMA or ketamine or if you
want to answer them individually based
on where they're at and phase 2 or 3
trials remember not science more just
your opinion your intuition well with
MDMA it's likely to be a medicine in
2021 and with the question about therapy
a trained therapist so that also brings
into questions and need to train
therapists and that's actually one of
the focuses of my medicine Australia
we're kind of here to
got the clinical outcomes look at the
clinical research and find ways of
translating that the therapeutic
practice so in the next year we hope to
start creating a therapist training
program these therapists initially will
be able to practice in the trials also
bake at they may just have the extra
knowledge so they could be integration
psychologists may not be able to
immediately practice psychedelic therapy
until regulatory approval has occurred
in terms of a timeline I'm not really
sure I feel that if we're able to get a
frickin concept study friend email so
ground in Australia we won't be that far
behind the u.s. so they're expecting
Maps is expecting 2021 as the release
for MDMA so maybe a year or two after
that Australia can follow behind we hope
to get everything lined up behind the
scenes for a pretty quick follow up on
the American deadline and as for
psilocybin I imagine it's going to be a
few more years after that the
breakthrough therapy status is a really
positive sign but we do need to have
phase 3 trials moving forward to star be
maybe a five-year mark you know that
that's very ballpark that's four
psilocybin and these are also only four
particular indications which is one of
the complications for each indication or
treatment or mental illness or disease
that we're treating you need to have
studied it so we need to have support to
treat OCD with psilocybin we need to do
phase 3 trials phase 2 trials for OCD
there will be a slightly different
treatment protocol after all as well so
first of all MDMA is gonna be treating
PTSD the Phase two trials in through
psilocybin a treatment resistant
depression and then I know that max has
plans think is a really exciting one
also a really sweet one the couples
therapy in the future or conjoint
partner therapy because an interesting
thing about PTSD and trauma is it
doesn't just affect the individual
affects the ecosystem and the people
around their individual so currently
they have been looking at trials where
not only the
Sothis from Troma is being treated with
MDMA but their partner is too and
therefore that partnership can find
better ways better solutions of healing
and growing in the face of the
difficulties that occur and you are in a
relationship with somebody who does have
a history of trauma they get ones a
really lovely one another indication so
when you say 20 21 for maps would that
come under the rubric of PTSD PTSD
complex PTSD PTSD anything that has a
history of trauma and so do you have two
would you have to get a prescription
from your local doctor onwards to that
it would be to their discretion with
PTSD yeah and then it would be there
would be cyclic therapist trained and
they currently in America there is a
quite a few training programs ones by
the California Institute of integral
studies CI is and also Maps has their
training programs are currently training
set up therapists in America and also in
Europe there's actually a couple of
Australian psychologists who have
already done the training with maps in
Europe so they can help us in the
creation of our own therapy training
program mm-hmm yeah that's interesting
it does raise this might be a bit of a
unnecessary concern but it's frustrating
still and as good as the movement for it
is it is still frustrating that one
would have to be diagnosed with PTSD if
say some of their issues were not ets D
related but still other issues that
could be helped whether it's depression
some other affliction so obviously we
want to get things moving across all
fronts where there looks like it's you
know it's relevant to do so but PTSD is
obviously a real thing and trauma is
obviously a real thing but recognising
oneself as a victim treating oneself as
a victim can be something that is
problematic when when it's overdone I
don't have a great point to make here
rather than to just potentially point to
a problem with having people look to
recognize you want people to take on an
issue that they maybe didn't have as
much to try and help with another issue
it's kind of frustrating that you have
to still go through different hoops but
go through there's a few things there
first thing is these labels that we use
classify mental illness or categories of
behavior that are necessarily always
accurately given or diagnosed and or the
sense of taking on a role after
receiving a diagnosis I am a depressed
person I have depression I am a victim I
have PTSD Allah that's a storyline and
there it's also in terms of experience
it's a cluster of behaviors it's a
cluster of behaviors I think it's really
important to recognize that we only
develop all these labels these clusters
of these clusters of behaviors in the
last century in fact probably more like
in the last 60 years or so and so I
started a definitive bucket that someone
should write really I think that's a
super important message call themselves
is that identity it's a useful clusters
okay so if I have this these clusters of
a few of these clusters of behavior I
have symptoms I had behaviors there
relate to OCD or ADHD and then with that
bucket leave now most closely associated
yourself with there are treatments there
are particular observations in
proactivity so you can say is maybe my
category that's not a definitive label
it so it is useful still it's useful I
think that this this movement from
calling oneself with PTSD via the shift
from victim to survivor is really a
really important one know unconsciously
calls themself or wants to have a victim
based mentality but it is a consequence
of a certain neurochemical changes it
occur after trauma as I said before this
soft repeating self-fulfilling
storylines yes that's no doubt true
this will take us off topic a bit but
I'm going to do it anyway
it is the case that quite a pervasive
lens people use to view the world at the
moment is one that divides the world up
into groups where some of those groups
are inherently oppressed by other groups
and so one's identity becomes similarly
why do I use that word one's identity is
taken to be that group identity of an
oppressed group when there may be real
individual trauma that's occurred in
their lives and that's all entirely
relevant but it is an unfortunate case
that there are ways of viewing the world
that box people up into these categories
before they engage with their individual
experience to the extent required for
the kind of growth and transformation
we're talking about yeah I hear that
and I have a few thoughts on that and I
think or one point is if there is such a
thing as multi generational trauma and
my first thought also is with trauma on
a neurological level it traps that
person in the past it traps that person
at the point at which the trauma
occurred they lose a relationship with
themselves in the present moment and in
the future I think this can occur from
an incident it can occur from multiple
incidents say a domestic abuse something
like that it can also occur occur I'm
not on a generational level of passed
down emotional habits of parents and
things like that so the first thing we
need to do in it whatever it when it if
we're trying to strike up a dialogue
which is present and forward orientated
is try and help people to build that
relationship with themselves in the
present and in the future quite
interesting neurologically the place
that we store our self-concept
as it is now and in the past it's
located in one area at the default mode
Network which we discussed before where
is the future self before moving Souls
is actually located somewhere else it's
located in the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex further forward and more lateral
and that's actually the area that is
generally associated with other people
so when we're thinking about our future
self on a near logical level it looks
like we're thinking about somebody else
so that really is a relationship then
that's what really is a relationship I
was also interesting is that in
depression and in trauma our ability to
access the alberene area of the brain is
diminished and in trauma even the car
itself is diminished so if you can't
know yourself in the present or in the
future happen you build a relationship
or a trajectory of where you want to go
which is one of the powers of these
medicines mm-hmm under the influence of
psychedelics acutely
we see increased communication between
these two regions in the brain mm-hmm
and we also see that after a psychedelic
experience participants were more
accurate about their future projections
in terms of outcomes in their lives and
this was measured in the psilocybin
study by Imperial this is the same study
that showed that with one large one
small dose of psilocybin for two doses
patients who had treatment resistant
depression so this is de precios being
treated by multiple antidepressants and
other forms of therapy and all attempts
have failed
I had a 67 percent rate of alleviation
of being free from their depression
either one week follow up at a
three-month follow-up it started to
decrease slightly around that point but
it was still significant so that's
that's interesting developing the
relationship with your future self
and therefore having more accurate
prediction about your own behavior and
who you can be I think they're beautiful
thoughts and so just in closing to tie
why I mentioned just before what's I
think most important is that we
recognize every individuals capacity to
take ownership of their own lives as a
essentially divine of fundamental
capacity now it's difficult because
there are some individuals who are
particularly embattled by life by their
experiences such that they cannot find
they cannot access that space to move
from agency and those people of course
require care right they require care but
it is a frustration of mine that we can
be too ready to define ourselves as
victims or oppressed due to our
membership in a group whatever minority
group that is sometimes a group as large
as women it's so necessary to engage in
your own experience and to recognize the
agency you have in your life to become
to make your life work I totally agree
and in fact I had a conversation during
the break with a another woman here who
is really pleased so another woman who's
really interested in the science of
psychedelics and followers researches
and organizations on Facebook Twitter
podcasts whatever it is she remark how
few female speakers there are in the
academic world of psychedelics so it is
recognizing your capacity and I did
recognize my capacity to become the
person and contribute in the way that I
wanted to be I wanted to be able to do
but there's also important to recognize
the current state of affairs and if
there is a there is clearly a agenda
disbalance in psychedelic science and
well I think that that's not necessarily
the problem was psychedelic science I
think is probably
more reflective on a pattern in society
at large and I do think this self
awareness in this agency to move
forwards regardless of the current
conditions regardless of the patterns
that you see you can you can be and
contribute in any way that appeals to
you personally yes I think a message of
individual empowerment ISM is is
appropriate and the point is only the
frustration when an individual doesn't
recognize their own power and capacity
due to a different set of ideas about
their skin color or agenda or
what-have-you
no it is partially defined by experience
and partially defined by as a self story
and these are stories that that are
underpinned in society well yes I mean
which we currently become aware of by
noticing the patents like noticing this
disparity of female voices in
psychedelic sites noticing the pattern
of intergenerational trauma in our
native people's communities I think all
this stuff is important to notice I'm
going to say that it's not self-evident
to me that the absence of women in
psychedelic science is due to something
one would call a pressure that may well
be a factor I don't know we see
differences in where men and women pop
up in the world and the professions they
choose for many different reasons this
is a conversation that has been had a
lot online and there's some really good
stuff out there and it's complicated
there is a strong biological and
psychological argument to be made for
differences in temperamental proclivity
between men and women that aren't
entirely due to social construction if
that's the case then you would expect
differences in the number of people that
go towards different professions this is
not to say that we should oppress people
into choosing one or another thing it's
just a recognition
sometimes we make different choices so
it's not self-evident to me that we
would expect a 50/50 split across every
area in society this is really an absurd
thought when you think about it there
are some professions that are entirely
male-dominated that I mean I don't know
why the hell you'd want to go into at
all the ones where you're more likely to
die doing outside hard manual labor like
climbing telephone wires and
what-have-you and is that partially
because there is narrow differences in
society that men ought to be brave and
more reckless and more strong and that
their lives in some sense because they
don't bear children are worth less on a
protective level is this one is this the
reason why because there is this
narrative I think this narrative plays
some role but I don't think that I don't
think that all narratives are
arbitrarily constructed and not grounded
in some adaptive reality and some
adaptive evolutionary don't play some
adaptive evolutionary function and that
our physiology bears our are better
suited nurse to one kind of thing or
another so I think both things are going
on and when there is a narrative that is
preventative of an individual from
taking the agency towards what they want
to be in their lives this is a problem
the only point I'm making is that it's
far from self-evident and in fact
extremely unlikely and even unnecessary
why we want to see a 50/50 split in
anything we don't see if you see a 50/50
split in things very very rarely like
not asking for a 50% split right no in
every I'm not ask you for that but I am
highly aware of my own experience as a
woman who studied science and the
feeling that I should maybe buy some
glasses to be taken more seriously
[Applause]
thanks guys
my questions are same topic but a little
different because of the efficacy of
mushrooms and MDMA my question is about
mescaline because from my understanding
experientially and from the chemical
structure it's a little bit of both so
can you explain like dude have they done
any studies what it actually does to the
brain and like would that be a more
useful tool combining them or for like
different treatments if you care to
elaborate yeah I think this is a really
great question a very Stute observation
it's actually a deeply felt topic of
mine for multiple reasons mescaline is
is a very interesting psychedelic and I
don't have just the affection purely
because it was the first one I heard of
in the doors of perception that's not
the only reason it comes down to also as
you say the pharmacological level it has
traits that do compared to MDMA in fact
you know I'm sure you'll remember the
name of this receptor after this it was
a soon for a long time that the receptor
that MDMA most activated I had the
highest affinity we were safe indeed to
describe binding pattern was a serotonin
receptor in fact no it's a I'm a
dazzling receptor I'm a dazzling I'm a
dazzling MDMA holder you'll probably
remember it and not many other
psychedelics do have a high affinity for
this receptor mescaline is one do M is
one best feeling more so than DM so if
if we sit we don't know this we don't
currently we don't have the
neuropharmacology knowledge to say that
I'm a dazzling does this however we have
the experiential correlation that MDMA
is a very heartfelt love inducing safety
inducing in the safety of the undo my
experience is really what underwrite
it's powers a therapeutic tool trauma
and PTSD being characterized by a lack
of safety a feeling of vulnerability
being a victim when you're put into this
loving space through MDMA you and you
remember the memories of your trauma
because the way the brain actually
processes memories is it just doesn't
just get it out of the file read it and
put it back in no it takes the file out
rewrites it and then throws away the old
one every time you remember something
this is the one of the potential weak
points of our memory that we're
constantly rewriting them whenever we
remember them but one of the strengths
for MDMA as a therapeutic tool in the
when you remember got trauma in a safe
place feeling like you're in a loving
environment you rewrite that memory with
this felt sense and the trauma the sting
is removed so if that does have some
relation to this receptor the MDMA does
have the highest affinity to then rescue
'ln is a very interesting therapeutic
target it also has a nice duration
similar to psilocybin less long than LSD
has there been any studies no and I
guess one of the things that I'd like to
see in Australia psychedelic research is
it's really wonderful that we have this
in Vincents trial end of life anxiety
palliative care is such a difficult
field emotionally for the fur boat the
doctors the individuals and their
families are so glad that we're going to
have this really powerful bridge at this
crux point of both individuals life and
their communities wife to support them
through this transition but I would love
to see Australia engaging in novel
research of our own making our own
flavor
I do think using mescaline as a target
would be a really exciting thing for
Australia to do I support presume on
researching mescaline
me too me too we have discussed it it's
just to bring a entirely new drug to
market it's very expensive I had a
conversation with Dublin who's the
executive director of maps not too long
ago and he estimated that it over the
course of all those years it will have
taken around 30 million US dollars to
have brought MDMA to market that's over
the course of decades potentially and it
was going it's going much faster for
psilocybin I think because a lot of that
academic conservatism is now worn down
there's a lot more or the receptive
nature in the field both from clinicians
and from culture itself so do that in
mind it probably wouldn't be as
expensive it is in that ballpark it's
very expensive to bring a truck to
market but it's a very rational
observation AMD that mescaline could be
a really profound target and something I
haven't heard tonight you talk about is
Emma ayahuasca and I wanted to ask you
about that and also perhaps and the the
practices of shamanism of what the
indigenous tribes people use in addition
and to the psychedelic so you know the
smudging the ocurro's I haven't you know
I saw they did the clinical start and
trial in Brazil with ayahuasca which is
very promising for depression but I just
thought I'd be interesting to comment on
ayahuasca and and shamanism in general
and if you think maps might incorporate
some shamanism into their studies yeah I
think that it's a really interesting
perspective to look at the past and see
how these medicines have been used and
in fact had been used for a very long
time by both different cultures and even
our own cultures if you somehow relate
to the European greco-roman tradition
where the Alison Ian mysteries existed
and was likely fuelled by something very
similar to LSD
that's within our own tradition Plato
was quoted as saying that it was one of
the most important parts of ancient
Greek culture
Cicero a Roman scholar was quoted as
saying that it was a civilizing aspect
of 18th Greek culture so that's
interesting so there was traditions even
that we can look at from back then well
you have some records of what they did
for their seven-day Ellis Tinian mystery
ceremony ritual I'd only have cultures
such as the Peruvian culture with
ayahuasca for centuries have been using
the brood gaining both DMT and Tomales
the Chur mio eyes which inhibit the
breakdown of DMT in the stomach so DMT
can last much longer
I definitely think looking at the
setting that they use is really valuable
we have lessons to learn such as the
music such as group work
I think group work is very interesting
and something it hasn't really been
explored as much in studies yet it's
quite a solo journey so I definitely
think that there is multiple ways to
combine therapy with psychedelics and
we'll have to decide and look out for
each indication for each treatment what
is most suitable for example with OCD
maybe with it what a degree of exposure
therapy but it would a combination of
psychotherapy with virtual reality where
they're faced with whatever certain
things that trigger the responses and
then would that be useful so in that and
you okay so mentioned virtual reality
from shamanism and you can so you can
tell I'm not at all restricted to where
this comes from I think that ancient
traditions certainly have value but I
also think we can make our own
traditions and we can combine technology
you can combine things like biomarkers
with and feedback live biofeedback
things like so for OCD when I think of
instantly is being aware that persons if
we're going to combine virtual reality
really checking in with that person
heart rate and breath right to know when
they've reached that point of I discard
verses I'm still able to process and
engage so a combination of Athena parson
looking at the future and looking
holistically at the body not just the
mind and ayahuasca yeah is this a really
powerful substance and there's really
interesting trials and how it alleviates
depression also I think that it was with
ayahuasca that we were shown that after
ayahuasca a certain mindfulness traits
were found to be increased like a lack
of activity acceptance and knowing the
profound effects that we do observe from
frequent mindfulness meditation practice
scientifically I think that's a really
interesting comparison if you're
predicting that in twenty twenty one
MDMA and then after that psilocybin will
be used in a medical sense and then at
the start you were saying that you don't
want these things sold on every corner
seven eleven but there's obviously a big
space between those two including
personal use of one of a bit of a cliche
word spiritual use do you see these
being able to like in after twenty
twenty-one will that open a space for
them to be more freely accessible and
what about the sort of the stigma that's
attached to them just as being purely
party drugs and how in twenty twenty one
for example MDMA will that be seen as as
a an alternate medicine or is it
something that's going to sort into the
mainstream and become acceptable or are
we going to be looking strangely at
these people that are that are taking
MDMA for these concerns
I think it's increasingly going to into
the mainstream and the fact that in
terms of clinical trials we artists seen
such better results than current
treatments allow it's just a matter of
wearing down that conservatism that does
exist with clinicians and the
reservations of associations with the
past
and the countercultural movement with
the 60s and 70s which i think is already
shifting and I guess I think intentional
psychedelic use with with the desire to
grow yourself is valuable not just for
people who have mental illnesses but for
the betterment of well people to theirs
matters everyone has something it's
unresolved everyone has something that
they would like to grow in themselves
would like to change in themselves to
become a happier more loving more whole
person I think that those seeking
psychedelics for those reasons should
have access to them in settings which
are therapeutic and safe with respect to
the spiritual question which is involved
here when we talk about this move
towards wholeness because the experience
of change at that kind of radical level
and the experience of connection to
yourself to connection between self and
then embodiment of that in the world
start using spiritual language very
quickly to encapsulate the quality of
these experiences and certainly them
their meaning for you and your life how
to mediate people's relationship with
their spiritual capacity is how to
mediate that as a society how to
approach that as an individual how to
use substances as tools in that pursue
these are questions that we do not have
good answers for we are in a process of
I believe building the forums for
discussion about just what's going on
with this kind of stuff to take place
the difference between regulatory
approved therapy using psychedelics and
the availability of substances to aid
spiritual development those two things
in some in some ways are so close
together but from a legal perspective so
far apart what is what is
spiritual and I definitely even still
coming from a scientific background
sometimes give a strange taste in my
mouth when I say the word but I don't
think it's a dirty word even for a
scientist because we can we can map that
territory there are qualities of it and
I think what underwrites it is a sense
of connection to something greater than
yourself and that definitely doesn't
have to be any kind of day stick god it
can just be nature or the universe or
whatever it is that drives you to want
to reach out connect grow and be part of
something so I think that this spiritual
is very intimately tied with the
therapeutic so there guess also
referring to recreational I want to
define the difference between
recreational if we go back to the
etymology of the word recreate
recreational that says that say it's a
kind of a fueling that's a kind of
growing it's a kind of a stopping and
pausing and seeing where we want to go
it's a time for reflection
I think the recreational unfortunately
has a lot of negative connotations and
the negative connotations I'm not an
advocate for anything to do with
psychedelics being there for escape for
that this attitude they sometimes see
and Dinkley other drugs that drug
culture of getting messed up or getting
locked or whatever they whatever it is
that people say I definitely don't
resonate with that I think that
recreation stopping and pausing and
looking at where you want to go is
something different and the spaces
should be built for people who want to
improve themselves in a therapeutic way
even if they don't have a very defined
label just because they want to become a
better person I think that I think
that's all reasonable and beautifully
put from the perspective of legality I
think they're different issues and I
would imagine that I push towards that
kind of
idea being allowed I'm not sure what
kind of approach that's going to take in
part
I mean it's there's gonna be a different
flavor it will have to be a different
point of collective awareness and I
think that has to take place at an
individual level and it's a different
point in the turning of the tide where
it won't be weather
well research into therapy will have
played a massive role to begin with but
we'll have to see some other kind of set
of ideas a different kind of front of
understanding take place in order to get
to this place well I what I'm trying to
say what I am saying is well I'm just
defining what I think is a therapeutic
context that's all I'm advocating for a
therapeutic context right now I think
that as people see the results of phase
you know where the point now where not
everything is confirmed but why we do
have phase 3 trials completed I think
that they'll be able interesting point
to stop and reflect about what is the
ideal therapeutic context of
psychedelics so touching on the topic of
group therapy and ayahuasca and doing
this sort of medicinal work with a
shaman there have been some research
that had said that this can indeed bring
up trauma and can help integrate pop
that trauma bubble so to speak so you
can integrate the lessons and make you a
new you but there's also arguments that
say that people who have dabbled in
these sort of psychedelics have also
seen a part of themselves ie the shadow
side that has traumatized them even more
and has not allowed them to go down the
path of self development and it's
blocked them as a matter of fact sir
what I my question really is because
having been in these circles a few times
and witnessing many Apple lettera of
healing and also detrimental work that
has been done from just being too
infused with the energies around you can
you walk us through the correct process
of how to process drama in the state of
such a heightened psychedelic experience
so you can bring that down and integrate
it into your reality and making the new
you because being at that state is so
tender it can actually be such a
detriment that you can walk away from
this going I'm never going to touch any
kind of psychedelic ever again or you
would want to delve even deeper into
your psyche and your shadow and you've
wanted to devote they even more
whichever way it goes but I'm speaking
to the experts now what is the correct
and most safest approach to being in
that state of mind discovering that
trauma and then integrating that back
into your reality and there's no
possible way but you and I get to that
question I also want to touch on like
this is this is why we're doing one
indication at a time why it's important
to find the therapeutic context the dose
for each treatment because we haven't
researched classical psychedelics like
psilocybin or ayahuasca with PTSD yet
because of this risk of retraumatization
which is one of the reasons that PTSD s
notoriously difficult to treat so that's
why it's important to follow we have to
wait for each indication to be put
through the rigor of a clinical trial
before we sort of jumped the gun we want
to create the systems that best treat
and best plan for each kind of
experience of the person may have which
is why I want to I do want to clarify as
well that this idea of the betterment of
well people has to happen very slowly
and with trials and with practice
protocols being developed and when it
comes to PTSD it is really hard because
of this really narrow window of
therapeutic tolerance that's why things
like exposure therapy are really
difficult and particularly with certain
types of trauma like sexual assault
there is exposure therapy of the 30%
dropout rate and only 50 I think 49% of
participant
have any clinical benefit that's not
very good
whereas MDMA there is generally in the
will all types of PTSD and 83% chance of
MDMA alleviating the PTSD I was that
experiential confrontation
I think it does a lot at play he has
dysregulated nervous system this hyper
arousal going on so I think the first
our first step is to become aware of
your biology find practice slowly ways
of noticing when your heart rate is
going up this is this is just for
general PTSD advices is gonna be applied
to any situation whether it be seeing a
trigger on the street a loud noise
becoming aware of the body through
slowly training in an awareness based
practice with particularly PTSD with a
good teacher we're the psychologist this
is not something it should be done by
yourself because even meditation can
retrigger people with PTSD it's a really
delicate condition so having someone who
can help you become aware of your own
body and when you're starting to go into
a trauma state so I see things people
cramping up there changing your position
movie becoming small protecting yourself
slowly noticing these physical symptoms
and being able to shift out of them
first awareness then every opening also
the way we talk to ourselves is really
is really important noticing what kind
of voices are occurring as you're
noticing yourself entering a trauma
state is there someone in your head part
of you putting you down
can you talk to them that seems a bit
strange I know but one of the increasing
popularity is as their there's a poetic
protocol called internal family systems
which is particularly relevant for
trauma because we see in trauma there's
a fractioning of the psyche often that
there's a part of the person that was
present at the moment of trauma that
becomes really stuck there
then there's the protector who tried to
come in and be the savior and said
lock off all your emotions we'll be fine
dissociate I'll be here holding the fort
and then so there's that that part that
was wounded there's a protector and
there's a part that just wants to be
distracted there are actually there's
patterns in the way the psyche becomes
fractured and sometimes these programs
these parts can become really really
entrenched and can end up putting that
person down or taking them back to the
moment of trauma very at times where
they are triggered but it's not always
obvious where the trigger is coming from
going back to that idea of relationship
and creating a relationship with these
different aspects of yourself talking it
through with yourself slowly in your own
mind or even out loud in a point of PTSD
crisis I think is really valuable and
having a meditation background slowly
trained really carefully with somebody I
think is a really really important and
valuable tool for anyone but for
particularly with PTSD and when it comes
to confronting parts of ourselves that
we find unsavory
I guess it's always a if you attach
yourself to another part of you you can
go there more easily if you call on your
strengths and call on the parts of you
that you know had the capacity to grow
and seek to grow
you could you have there might be
shadows we also have allies within
yourself you also have beauty within
yourself and you also have a poetic
lively being that you're cultivating and
being I find that to deal with the
shadows we also have to developed our
relationship with that part of ourselves
to forward forward moving forward
flowing aspirational part of ourselves
because they can be an ally and talk of
times that we can call upon when helped
us be prepared to stand face and face in
the eye the parts of ourselves that we
either wish weren't there or need extra
help to deal with growing both aspects
and
a relationship with that I think is
really helpful that's a stunning answer
really really beautiful minute so I
think I'm not really going to add to
that but I'm interested at the
philosophical level or how - there's
another level of categorizing your own
inner relationship with yourself when
what you encounter can be so confronting
anomalous Drive you into a state of fear
or chaos I think there's some mixture of
paying attention to that in a
challenging way and then paying
attention to that in a way of release or
acceptance that seems to be at play
sometimes there's a time to wake up and
identify with a particular content of
experience and live that out and feel it
and other times you sort of at least in
my experience perhaps to just breathe
and watch but this integration of what
you can encounter in yourself that is
scary or anomalous to you or disgusting
is so key recognizing the different
valence is the positive and negative
feelings all part of one adaptive system
but then yeah I mean though that the
point about voluntary exposure I think
is super crucial and that's why a
certain setting and doing this stuff
with as much responsibility and
awareness as possible is so appropriate
because there's no help whatsoever in
throwing a baby into an ocean so gotta
give that thing swimming lessons you one
more question please and then one more
question then we'll end
okay so I've heard of maps prism
Imperial College London in a bunch of
whoever tonight's the first night I've
ever heard of mind medicine and I'm
assuming that's based here Melbourne can
you tell us a bit more about that yeah
so my medicine Australia
was first conceived of it it's in the
last year or so and officially we opened
as a charity like late last year and so
we're a charity for health promotion for
investigating communicating better
understanding the potential of regulated
and research back cyclic medicines and
we seek to act as the hub or the nexus
between academia between clinicians
between the government regulatory bodies
and also culture and to create real
shifts in the perception and awareness
of how these medicines may help a large
proportion of our population who are
currently experiencing mental illness so
my medicine Australia I was actually a
funding partner in the first Australian
research trial with prism it's in
Vincents and we also seek to create a
therapist training program in the future
in a regulatory accredited environment
for professionals we also will be
running events a conference a
large-scale international conference
hopefully in the next year or so and I
guess we are born of the fact that we
are entering a new paradigm for mental
health and that psychedelics are
definitely a key aspect of this new
paradigm and we also seek to incorporate
other things like technology biomarkers
virtual reality in time we're seeking
innovation in mental health were not
we're not our only focus on psychedelics
it is our key interest area because
there's so much potential but in the
future we want to see how do we treat
the patient holistically I say
holistically how do I treat how I treat
both the body and the mind because
they're so intimately related so we hope
to have in the future when there is a
regulatory approved psychedelic medicine
we would like to have treatment centers
that have a combination of psychotherapy
classes both for
being and psychological awareness and
yeah I think it's a really exciting
endeavor I really appreciate all of you
checking out the event next week and
also just following us and if you have
skills you'd like to contribute we are a
charity and that we have about a number
of volunteers helping us and this is
something that we really need anyone
who's interested in change in Australia
to get on board with and a team
statement earlier this is a great dinner
conversation this is this is a great
conversation starter and you'll be
surprised by the reception that you get
I wear I'm a cyclic compound around my
neck and that's mainly to practice that
first conversation about something that
some people might see is impertinent but
by the end as often the greatest
scientific questions have been first
impertinent it becomes pertinent when
you communicate it I have my dad in the
audience he's been a great supporter of
my chosen career path and of my healing
with psychedelics and that first
conversation was a little scary for me
my dad's a lawyer also a scientist
thankfully and I've noticed for example
my mom is less of a scientist she's more
of a feeler more of a heart centered
person so I had a different conversation
with her with my dad I spoke of the
research studies I focused on the
figures the numbers at 67% of people
with depression and 83 percent of people
with PTSD with my mom it was more of a
story of hope
and a story of lateral thinking that
could change lives so there's many ways
to go about it
if I encourage all of you to share what
you've what you know what you've learned
here if you need to learn with those
around you that's how we can create real
change beautiful
my medicine Australia org mine all right
well that brings this evening to a close
thank you all very much for coming boys
club comm is where you can stay in touch
with what I'm doing with this project
that's where this conversation will be
posted and there will be links to what
melissa is doing there in fact Melissa's
being on boy's club a few times before
she had a wonderful conversation with
Rick Doblin which really is I think
quite beautiful was recorded in Prague
and that's something that's available to
listen to online we also had a
conversation with Gabor Marte which was
interesting as well that's available to
watch online and also is a guy called
dr. Matthew Johnson who's one of the
leads scientific researchers into this
stuff right now and on Sunday I'm
releasing a conversation with a guy
called dr. Torsten Pasi who's arguably
the world's leading expert on
psychedelic science and that was an
interesting conversation too so there's
lots of content out there and there will
be more events like this in the future
and about other topics as well so please
I do invite you to go to boys club comm
and sign up to the mailing list to stay
in touch and it would be lovely to see
you all again so thank you so much and
thank you minister
[Music]
[Applause]
[Music]
if anyone does want to volunteer or
reach my medicine Australia the emails
really simple it's just polo at my
medicine Australia
[Music]