good morning welcome to meditating with
John for baking I'm a cognitive
psychologist an acog neuroscientist at
the University of Toronto academically
in scientifically study phenomena like
mindfulness and related phenomena like
Insight flow mystical experience
transformative experience higher states
of consciousness the cultivation of
wisdom the aspiration to enlightenment
I've also been practicing the past the
meditation meta contemplation Tai Chi
Chuan and she come for over 29 years and
teaching them professionally for almost
20 years
welcome this is a progressive course
every Monday is a dharma day and on that
day I teach principles and practices
that build on previous lessons if you if
you're joining us for the first time
you're of course welcome if you go to
the notes the description for this video
you'll find links to previous lessons
and sits and you can go through the
previous lessons and catch up Tuesdays
through Fridays are sick days we meet I
will sometimes review the practices and
principles discussed on Dharma day
Monday and then we sit together at the
end of every meeting Monday through
Friday there is a Q&A please keep those
here that those questions write to this
specific set of practices I'm teaching
you for more comprehensive questions
perhaps you know how does this fit into
more comprehensive way of life or how
did Buddhist practices compare the stoic
practices what does this have to do with
the meaning crisis or responding to it
there's two things you can do one is to
bring your questions to my live stream
QA it'll be this May 15th not this
Friday not tomorrow but a week tomorrow
May 15th at 3 p.m. est and you can bring
those more comprehensive questions there
I answer questions live stream for an
hour at that time you can also check out
my video channel and I'll talk about
that
at the end of today's session and which
you can find a lot of videos that
address these more encompassing issues
it would be a help to me and potentially
to other people if you liked this video
stream that will raise its visibility on
the YouTube algorithm and that will help
me to reach as many people as I can with
a what with this I believe strongly
believe very helpful or set of practices
okay so I think that's everything we
need to do please remember to sit to get
your own second into it
do not disturb your posture ready and we
will begin when I say begin begin
you
you
[Music]
slowly being in to come out of your
practice climbing as best you can to
integrate what you cultivated in your
practice with your everyday
consciousness and cognition
perhaps by reciting the five primal
promises to yourself
here we have time for a few questions
the first is some pleasure of doubt in
meta when contemplating for example the
rule you're assuming an assigning should
this be done by internal dialogue are we
to have almost a conversation or ahead
about it that's that's very very close
to getting it right this goes back to a
you know principle that we keep coming
back to and there's no there's nothing
wrong with constantly coming back to it
that we're going to use inner speech
it's the raft to cross the river in your
speeches or coach it's a way we're
coaching ourselves eventually if like if
you're going to be an athlete you start
with the coach eventually right you move
to the point where you're doing behavior
on your own and so you're talking to
yourself and then what you're trying to
do is you're trying to do the minimal in
order to do the practice and you're
trying to slowly erode how much you have
to speak to yourself in order to do the
practice initially you will have to
almost have like an internal dialogue
but as I mention like when you walk
around a room and you're noticing things
and you're moving your body in a
skillful manner you don't have to be
talking to yourself to do that and so
you're going to move towards that so it
becomes second nature to you so start
out with that but you you always have
that you have this grateful but
tentative relationship to the inner
speaking the inner coach another
question from Dias many times my
distractions come during the rooting
process and they are very strong
distractions what should i do should I
apply of the five methods yes so if
you're in the middle of rooting and
you're getting some very powerful
distraction you know apply the five
factors of inquiry month was when you
get that moment if you get that moment
of silence usually when you know the
destruction goes away you get to the
depths of it try to bring that silence
but that silenced sensitivity back to
the rooting process or try to renew your
interest what's new what's been going on
in my body like in where I'm rooting
when you return one more question for
today reminder that Tuesdays and
Thursdays are days when
we have to have a you know and just
before 10:00
Simon get ik Hermanson some thought
seems to activate muscles in the jaw
tongue related to speech while others
more think themselves any knowledge on
that phenomenon yes so for some forms of
thinking we do what is called
subvocalization in which we're actually
starting to engage speech muscles this
might be what's behind the throat chakra
idea so a lot of the chakras are
probably I don't hold it there but a
physical interpretation but I think they
have a lot to do with having bodies we
are so we know that well you have very
good at humiliating evidence and
converging argumentation that we
recognize things by actually generating
them and that there's a deep connect so
I recognize your movement by using the
same parts of my brain by which I move
my own body to recognize your movement
and vice versa and so and now another
aspect that perception and imagination
are not two separate processes but just
perception is more how information is
coming in and then imagination is how
the mind is you know predicting and
correcting for that incoming data so
imagination of reception or into open
like this generating behavior and
recognize it or interval them like this
and so that's what's going on we're
often certain kinds of thinking we we
want to embody them more and so we'll
get into more focalization embody them
more often give us more of a sense of
agency that we're getting more into
action alright everyone so thank you
very very much for joining it's always a
great pleasure I'm really enjoying doing
these sessions I want to thank my dear
friend and techno major Marv he's always
behind the scenes making things run very
fluidly and fluently my blubbered son
jason is always here helping please
subscribe to this channel to be notified
of the next video you'll also find in
videos on there that have to do with a
lot of these talk
it's discussed in more depth how to put
this into the whole ecology practice the
cultivation of wisdom responding to the
meeting crisis there's a video coming
out tomorrow publicly on my channel
voices with reveille P in which I have a
discussion powder Hallet about authentic
dialogue what I call Tia logos on these
new discord platforms that are emerging
and so I think that's very very
interesting phenomena and how it's going
to relate to the kind of stuff that
we're talking about I'm trying to build
together here today so you might find
that helpful please invite others who
might benefit by sharing this series a
reminder that we'll be doing this every
Dean every weekday morning every weekday
morning at 9:30 est please remember
continuity of practice more important
than quantity of practice there is no
enemy worse than your own mind there is
no ally true friend greater for you in
your own life thank you very much
everyone
I'll see you tomorrow