today I'm gonna walk you through my
health history so that I can point
people to here when they have questions
as opposed to having to keep explaining
it again and again which just kind of
adds to the symptoms keep talking about
the symptoms add symptoms is this weird
like a negative affirmation it makes it
worse when the positive ones can't undo
it like I can't just pretend I'm not in
pain or have energy because my brain
cause on that like it's like no
that's not true either so like the
positive ones don't work and the
negative ones just lead to this like
negative positive feedback loop so
that's what this video is in 2005 I was
twenty five third year of University
experiencing double vision demanded that
they give me a cat scan after weeks of
them thinking it was anything else and
it turns out I had brain tumors I was
right and I had an acoustic neuroma
which is a tumor on your hearing nerve
and because you can only have one of
those and they open me up a 93 it turns
out it was also to mention Ouma's and
just so happened they were on my Harry
nervin to my hearing canal so they had
to disconnect the nerve in order to kill
part of the tumor and so I'm definitely
or as well as I guess there's less
balance on that side but that's a lot
more easy to cope with as well as after
the surgery I was taken off with
steroids in the hospital and then sent
home which is what they do medically for
like the population but for me
personally as an individual with my own
chemistry bad decision and my brain
swells I started acting like a toddler I
was really sensitive to lightning sounds
and the proper temper tantrum I ended up
going to my GP which was just down the
street and she didn't know that that was
a problem went to call my my surgeon my
roommate didn't know my friends ended up
coming over to check on me and saving my
life and remitting you the hospital but
the process to recover for my first
brain surgery was a lot longer due to
the fact that I had that brains
lasted for days either way I was gonna
be definitely air but that brain
swelling is what could've slashed
shouldn't have happened if things had
been done right for me personally and so
I was 25 I continued on with my life I
got my university degree I dated like I
probably separate them I started working
for Vancity which is a local credit
union all pro credit union cooperatives
we get into all these things in other
videos and then went on to do to work
for the government well I was working
for the government it's not she that was
in ten it's five years later I've been
getting a yearly MRI to see about the
the tumor that I had in 2005 and it
turns out it was still growing it's
surgery was not successful and so my
options were either to continually have
surgery every ten years or to have
radiation and I didn't want to have
radiation but it felt like it was my
only option into Western medicine and so
I did I opted for a course of radiation
and well undergoing it I was exhausted
and nauseous and I'm sensitive to light
and sound like before but now this added
fun of smell as well as his brain fog
and all the things you undergo during
radiation are supposed to go away after
and mine didn't and that's not normal
but I'm not normal I figured out so
dealing with this what they track
everything up to mental still like it's
PTSD you're under stress and you go back
to where like your brain was under
radiation but whatever it happens to be
that's what happens I go under stress
and it's like I'm back having radiation
I get nauseous my brain stops working in
fact sometimes I think I'm having a
stroke
it is dysfunctional enough and I get
really sensitive to light sound and
smells and it's just not not the
greatest I went back I was still working
I was experiencing depression and just
sadness and feeling like crap because I
allow radiation and also this new health
 that I didn't want to have to deal
with but also realizing that possibly my
depression was from
being a mom and not seeing that on the
horizon with the current guy I was with
and so I and we broke up and I had a
baby on my own which was it was like I
was following my life path I was listing
and there was a lifting of the
depression and what came along with the
depression but not all of it because I
still had all of the symptoms from
radiation hi my pregnancy actually I
ended up having slightly more energy
then then I did before up till the end
were that's its own video the whole
community and pregnancy and end up with
three days of being at home laboring
with contractions less than 10 minutes
apart which was a freaking marathon I
was so exhausted by the end of the third
day I was like give me anything I went
in went in got an epidural slept for a
day ended up needing a c-section miss
her heart rate kept dropping so I came
home with a brand-new baby single bomb
abdominal surgery after four days of a
marathon and I had never felt better I
was in this postpartum euphoria I could
deal with the pain in my stomach because
it was just pain in my stomach it was
pills and fine all I had to do I lucked
out and had someone able to come and
cook and clean for me for six weeks
after and all I had to do like for the
year I was off I had no financial stress
I made more money than I'd ever made
while I was on that leave I didn't have
like the knee I didn't know worse kept I
didn't have things scheduled I you know
had to bring her to her her few doctor's
appointments even the beginning the
midwives come to you like it was just
life was easy and I was thriving and
then when it came time to go back to
work all this stress hit me and it was
like Oh God
and I contacted my work to add to like I
can't go back to how I was before baby
or no baby I was not meant to work full
time like I was all I was doing the
sleeping and working that was it I would
sleep on Wednesdays and sleep on the
weekends and work and only 40 like 37.5
hours a week and it was still exhausting
and I'm like does everyone feel this
ridiculous and and then feeling the
opposite side of that jory not leave I
couldn't go back to how
was before and my work wouldn't
accommodate me they're like don't worry
well you'll get our third-party
disability and I didn't because they
wouldn't accommodate me and so then I
had to go on social assistance and
eventually on disability but I had to
use the food bank and I had all this
like huge financial stress I couldn't
pay off my Curtin my haven't minimums on
my credit card I couldn't pay my student
loans I didn't know if I could pay food
except on my credit cards which clearly
we're gonna get cut off students they
can't pay for them and it was just
really stressful and the more stress I
was under the worse I got so I went from
like how can I work full-time or can I
work like 75% how do I manage this - I
can't work at all I don't know if I'm
ever gonna be able to work and
everything like they aren't attributing
what I go through to radiation or having
brain surgery but it very much feels
time for me it's like okay they're like
just stressed you know just depressed
like I'm not depressed anymore this is
not depression I got diagnosed with
anxiety which was one of the labels that
was like and it helps me just naming it
helped me kind of like breathe through
it and let it go and I still have it
it's still a part of who I am but it
doesn't run my life and it's not what
causes everything I have to listen to it
because it causes stress and stress is
horrible for me but it's not it's not
the problem and that this whole health
issue has taught me to listen to myself
even more than science because science
is like for the masses and your own
individual self is like you know vice I
had a third circa 2005 surgery 2010
radiation another surgery in 2015 and I
fought for steroids I was like and they
refused to be went to take me off of
them while I was in the hospital and I
regressed in the hospital like I was
having this amazing conversation with my
roommate and it just went downhill no
spirit released that day and I did but
they put gave me hysteresis at home like
I'm not selling oh my goodness they
tapered me off over over two to three
weeks and it was fine and that's what
they should have happened the first time
but they didn't know and I didn't know
to fight for it so it's that I've learnt
a lot from having this condition and
also that because none of that was
associate I had to find new answers and
fighting for a diagnosis of chronic
fatigue because I could see my mom have
it and I had every symptom and you guys
have tested everything and it's weird
cuz they're like well you have brain
tumors like you you
explosion you can't be exploded I'm like
yes but does that explain what I'm
experiencing no then if this if you
can't explain it and we've looked at
everything then this is what explains it
so I've chronic fatigue which means that
I can't recover from being exhausted
like other people so I can't just let
myself get exhausted and then sleep and
recover I have to it takes me a long
time to recover it takes me like days
and days and days to recover from having
a bad day it takes me if I don't listen
and I push through it it takes weeks or
months to recover and that's what you've
learned when you get chronic fatigue is
that you have to listen to your
boundaries and you have to listen to and
for me personally all of my conditions
are made worse under stress so I've had
to de-stress my life which both involves
taking away things that are stressful
and stop letting myself getting stressed
about stuff I don't need to get stressed
by and then some things are just
stressful and I have to deal with them
and every time I have a new episode it
puts me that little further down because
it's like I crashed and I am the energy
to kind of come back up but my new
plateau is less than and less than I
didn't want to say that cuz I feel like
the negative part makes it less than and
less than and it's all of that together
this chaotic chaotic mess but that's a
big piece of I don't know if I got into
like the more more recent like I have
chronic fatigue I have fibromyalgia
jeans my body is exhausted and in pain
and don't have fibromyalgia I have
something that I'd say it's not Vermeil
Jen is in the same category as but I
don't know were the diagnosis name which
is weird so remember Serena Elia which
is something I got diagnosed with that I
didn't have and they got undiagnosed
with participatory or a whole thing and
I'm gonna get into another video about
very much why I think that me God the
universe whatever it gave me this
condition gave me exactly who I am so I
would have no choice but to do this
global cooperative and no choice but
just so operative and so I'm gonna get
into that on another video but I think
that's all I'm going to be able to do
today maybe I'll do another video down
the line explaining it more succinctly
that is edited but today it's live today
it's one take so that is
my medical history in a minute all right
take a seat huh