so while I was in Australia I applied to
UBC got in and got into the science one
program which is pretty prestigious
program I possibly got into it because I
was a mature student I had taken four
years off so I was twenty-one everyone
else was like eighteen I don't think I
would have passed my first year and
continued on if I hadn't been in science
one because there was a sense of
camaraderie we helped each other so
although I didn't understand physics
there was at least people on my team
that would understand it and help me
through it we like did some of our tests
and teams so they helped at that part we
had open book tests and we weren't
expected to memorize and regurgitate
information we were expected to tackle
hard problems like scientists should we
the calculus teaching that year was a
 show because it was taught in this
weird where we weren't expected to have
had it not every high school teaches
calculus so they couldn't expect you to
have had it but because the vast
majority of students in science one had
learnt it they taught it in this way
that was weight over heads of people who
hadn't learned it like myself and way
under the heads of people who had
something under it was too easy for
people who had already learnt it but the
intertwining of having these 70 students
learn biology and chemistry and physics
and math together in the same room and
be able expected to tackle problems was
amazing then I went on to second year
where everything was regurgitation
everything was memorize it and
regurgitated on a test and because of
how science won all those people went on
to physics and chemistry and biology
there was always at least one or two
people from science one in your in your
class and so you had like a ready-made
study group you also had a ready-made
place to go and have a study group
because you just went hunt out the old
science one classroom with the new
science one kids I got to experience
like the politics of science and
understand more of like who gets into
Medical School
not people I want to trust
the people who know how to fake their
grades and know how to like get on
student council and then never
participate in it just so they can put
that on the resume I got in I was ended
up working in a laboratory and getting
paid partly because from the science one
experience and that experience was
amazing because we would sit in on lab
meetings and we were treated like we
were members of the lab even though we
were undergrad students we got to
troubleshoot the experiment run the
experiment help design it it was the
point where we were I think going to
have our names on the published article
but I don't think we ended up having
them on there because we're undergrad
students I also got diagnosed with brain
tumors I was in university which will be
its own its own video I ended up taking
an integrated science degree which is an
option when you are in university I took
a minor in economics but you can't have
a minor and an integrated science degree
so I don't actually have a minor in
economics by checking off courses to
have what would be a minor
integrated science degree meant I didn't
have to follow the usual path I got to
pick and choose the courses that I
wanted and the sciences I wanted to
integrate from genetics the super-small
how does our DNA dictate our lives and
ecology how does the big system work and
for me that was very intuitive and like
of course the genetics interplays and I
need economics to use it in the actual
world and economics in a college you're
actually very intertwined with their the
Wow the formulas that are in both of
them exponential growth and there's a
there's a lot of similarities but the
fact that like they couldn't see the
genetics in ecology were were natural to
integrate and I could was also iOpener
they're like know what we mean is
chemistry and biology you need to take
like to relate unrelated fields that we
can see the relative to you can see how
you bring chemistry into biology there
if there is biological chemistry that is
a field it's probably not called that
exact word I can't take a peek that word
but I think biochemistry
it's called biochemistry all of my
university experience I'm so happy I had
it I don't think it was worth the
$40,000 I paid for it because what I
learned wasn't necessarily than the
textbooks it was like learning
everything you don't know learning that
even after you have an undergrad degree
even after your passion about something
you kind of have to go on to a masters
and a PhD both to work in it but also to
truly feel like you have something to
offer you have to tackle a problem and
the two places in science reader
laboratory or field and I knew the lab
the lab work wasn't quite for me I
couldn't see myself doing that as a
career
coming in at seven eight like coming in
all night like pipette petri dishes and
you know you was spending months and
months to come up with the Eureka moment
and then maybe not because the
experiment failed it was there wasn't
quite enough payoff for me to be in that
and I was in school to become like the
jane goodall of elephants and I realized
I don't actually want to be outside
following elephants around it was like
the romantic idea of what I was gonna do
versus the actual idea and I think
getting brain tumors during it as well
changed my brain changing injury during
taking University what's a big thing and
so I went to university I got a degree
it's in ecology and genetics with minors
and economics