yet the infrastructure exists we don't
have to recreate a railroad we don't
have to recreate a lot of what we can we
can work backwards from there but we it
gives us the power and the tools to do
what we need to do without the downside
of it being owned by Google and Facebook
and which is that we don't trust it and
we're not doing it together and we don't
own it together and so there's a lot of
what we can do together that they will
never be able to do that we can
out-compete them with like they can't be
transparent in the fact that they
collect our data they kind of are but
like we get that it's only used to sell
us more stuff that is also destroying
our plan whereas when we collect our
data in a way that is empowering to the
like where you get to hold it and you
get to decide whether you use it for the
collective good and you're good you're
only going to give up your data if you
get a direct benefit and you can see the
group benefit so if we give up our data
in a wait it's safe so you can't
necessarily attribute it back to me
right you can't look up like my medical
information but if my medical
information is washed and available to
the whole those are that's the way we
can like cure cancer that's the way when
if what I spend money on is is washed
and made it safe and then we're able to
use that data we can recreate the entire
means of production when it makes sense
to do so right to be like hey your whole
neighborhood is buying this thing what
if you work together to create it what
if you you know and designing the tools
to be able to implement those solutions
when anyone comes up with a new idea
instead of them needing to go through
the arduous process of creating a
business and seeing if it's viable in
the market in competition game a
landscape they can bring it to the
collective and say hey how do we this is
the spark of an idea how do we make it
better how do we make it so that
everybody wins
because the idea is in the co-operative
any new person who joins is bringing
with them their data their ideas their
experience in a way that you never want
the only way we were limiting who's
coming on board is if you can't yet
accept more people right if you have a
limited servers
to 10,000 people you can't necessarily
jump to 10 million but we want to jump
to 10 million so we're going to be
incentivized to like okay how do we
double and then double and then double
in a way that is sustainable yep so I
get it and the reason why I get it is
that in fact like even your example
about the credit unions I barked up that
tree myself and in in and it sounds like
maybe you're in Canada yeah so uh in in
the states I ended up I think at some
point even had a conversation with
somebody who was part of the federal
agency that manages or governs credit
unions because precisely I was trying
figure out how do you hack that system
to get something that could scale and
she was great because she said look
here's a deal
betting can happen like the is the rules
and it was really gonna happen and well
what you're doing is definitely in the
rules I guarantee you they're not gonna
let this happen
which is a good like a good learning
experience about kind of the nature of
what's happening but yes and then the
next thing I'm nodding yes at is sorry
the way that I think it's very difficult
for me to express and I get that easy
term and I appreciate you trying to do
it easy do you do you by any chance do
you happen to listen to the the podcast
that I did recently with that guy called
venture stories I was just listening to
it before talking to you and there was a
lot of language I did not understand but
because part of it is in my backgrounds
I am I got bit for sure big chunks of
what you were you were trying to say so
I only listened to about half of it the
second half weirdly but I dropped the
ball in the last ten minutes because he
he had a he has to question where he
involved a invoked economist I don't
know in the economist it become this was
basically saying sort of margret
thatcher's thing of like yeah it's
unsustainable but you know maybe it's a
thousand years before collapses and what
else is there and and the answer is that
there is something else in fact not only
is there something else but that
something else is if you just kind of
clearly and what has been emerging in
the context of what we've just been
doing you see it happening you know the
story that I the ultimately I wanted to
share here cuz I probably already got it
so we're just basically nodding heads at
each other for a little while is if you
take a look at industrial capitalism and
go let's not go all the way back let's
start with like trains so you've got
iron and steel and and machinery and you
kind of do a snapshot every phase change
every major upgrade so you kind of go
Carnegie steel and you do Ford Motors
and then you do General Electric and
then you jump into IBM and then you jump
into HP and you jump into Apple and then
you jump into Google what you see is
there's a there's a line it's like
there's a movement that happens where
the humans the individual humans become
more and more important and the context
becomes more and more humane because it
is in the collaborative capacity
creative collaboration is increasingly
becoming the obvious center of what's
being done and so I have to do sort of
extend that a little bit I draw a little
just okay what's next like what's just
that error we've got an error of this
got this really great vector that you
can just sort of draw now just imagine
you should project that vector one step
further that's what you're talking about
saying hey let's just fully realize the
thing that's been unconsciously
happening industrial capitalism make it
conscious uh-huh funny I actually not
intending the phrase conscious
capitalism which i think is an effort to
not do this but let's make that thing
self-aware which is if we focus the
energy on enabling human beings to be
fully realized human beings expressing
their creative collaboration with each
other which is non-trivial it's not an
easy thing but if we pull that off then
you get all the rest for free like our
everything else starts to flow yes we
all we all get the genius that is
unlocked by humanity getting to live
their genius yep yeah that's it and it's
and it's and again like for me it's
concretely saying and look guys it's
like you've seen it you know that thing
where you move
people living like in cubicles and suits
to sitting in beanbag chairs to you know
having a whole mix like the whole
plethora of all the different type
haulage use of humans and where they
come from like just recognizing that
it's just a matter of just knowing that
and then just creating context that
enables it again there's non-trivial and
and you're also swimming upstream every
time you try to do this thinking that
the rule allow it you keep getting that
answer yeah the rules a lot but it's
really not gonna happen so you have to
be thoughtful yeah and I don't know
there's ideas I have around that like
there's a certain what's the word like
security that comes in the fact that
what I've envisioned is something we
will do transparently there is a point
where that can absolutely be stopped
ie someone could kill me right now or
somebody could you know what I mean like
if there's 12 of us you can just silence
or by those people out right 10,000
people and there's a million people when
there's 10 million people and our
foundation is we have to be transparent
we're running a tech company where
everybody has access to all the
information as default so doesn't mean
there are some areas maybe where that's
not happening yeah if somebody comes in
and needs like if we were doing the
credit union thing together we could
find ways around that much more easily
than a dozen people or a hundred people
because part of it is the people with
power and money have decided that
they're not going to allow that to
happen and the people who empower the
people with power and money are us the
99 percent were the ones that give them
our money we're the ones who allow them
to have that power
so they're like if we if there's enough
of us there's basically nothing we can't
do but we hit there has to be enough of
us right we can break the patent system
for things especially like
pharmaceutical drugs that are like Iran
or any what your yeah people are dying
because of insulin you I think
we're not gonna stand for that a lot of
these things happen because the
informations in a vacuum it's like you
know you're fighting the credit union
system but the world doesn't know you're
fighting the credit union system yes all
right so guys can I share two things
with you yeah and where I would I'd like
is
well ultimately my intent is essentially
just to empower you oh and that I'm
seeing kind of two or three ways there
one is to say okay the the work that we
did in OG game B there was work that was
done between 2010 and 2013 14 by a
pretty good group of people is helpful
but there's some good ideas there that
can maybe just you don't have to
reinvent the wheel we could just give
them to you
second is then getting a deeper sense of
where you are and how we can find ways
to bring collaborators into your context
that can hold more and carry the things
so the thing has more embodiment and
then the third is like that that's sort
of that mysterious third always sort of
listening to see what can't really be
thought through but nonetheless is
actually knocking at the door trying to
emerge but being opening up the space
and being open and available to listen
where that is if you use that sound like
a nice yeah absolutely
space I've had to be in by myself is
that constant knocking at the door which
doesn't necessarily work by yourself but
is also a lot easier by yourself like
it's like okay what is the next piece
that I'm not getting and then my brain
crates it and then my brain creates it
but if we're not creating it I have to
sell it to people as to emerge through
the group and that is where yeah well
you've got it that's exactly right it's
so much it alright so what I want to
start at is with it feels like you're
pretty feisty so we can do the feisty
stuff put this in context that there is
the feisty stuff sits in a container or
in a context of nurturing all right so
there's if things are in the right
relationship so the what may sound even
possibly scary is it is scary but it
only is you only do it in two contexts
where there's actually a really solid I
think of it as a womb like a really
solid nurturing context and it has your
name
it's the Jubilee so this is a technology
that we worked
to figure out how to deal with asymmetry
of power so when gaming to the degree
which game a decides that it wants to
actually this is a be nasty the Jubilee
is a as far as I can tell and there's
been a lot of thinking about this a way
of instantiating what you were just
talking about we hold the power that
cuts through the various well there's an
usually with the language and game
theory call it Nash equilibrium
no I know a bit about game theory but I
don't know exactly what the Nash
equilibrium is so the Nash equilibrium
is where everybody has made a choice on
the on the basis of what they see as
being the possible choices and nobody
will change their choice now that the
choice has been made so what happens is
like we've all kind of like we've got
ourselves into group into a bit of a
bind where we may actually be able to
notice that there's a better better
thing over there but none of us will go
because it doesn't make sense for even
for one two or three of us to go we kind
of all have to go but if anybody didn't
even if one person defects the whole
thing doesn't work so it's a your stock
you're in it's and it's it's stable it
actually is quite stable so from one
point of view it's a good thing it's a
stable state from another point of view
it's a bad thing cuz you're stuck you
can't change so one of the reasons why
we haven't been able to execute the the
sovereignty that is inherent in us as as
being is these is a Nash equilibrium and
one of the characteristics of this is
for example as a collective action
problem you know how do you get a bunch
of people to do something where if it's
not enough do it it doesn't work so
here's the construct you ready so
there's four components to it the first
component is the the commitment the
second component is the is the oath the
third component is the trigger and the
fourth component is the payload so
they're all they're tied and they
connect so the commitment is you know I
Jubilee Briscoe some
ironically agree I sign up that when
these things happen I will do these
things and you should imagine like
technically you should as a video and
you upload it to a blockchain or
something like that but it's anonymous
all right it's sealed it's encrypted and
so I will do these things when a million
other people have signed up you know so
it's a kick to sort of like collective
action problem solution once a critical
mass of people who have made the
commitment alongside me it's activated
all the commitments become unsealed we
move from anonymous to transparent and I
do the I do the thing that I'm
committing to and the thing that I'll be
committing to is a Jubilee which is to
say that I will at the moment of the
triggering I will no longer pay any
debts that I owe I will no longer
enforce any debts that are owed to me
and I will support in every possible
circumstance every jurisdiction where I
have the right to vote formal policies
that that jurisdiction enact the same
policy and to the the city of what do
you live thank you
City of Vancouver a good target City of
Vancouver will formally issue a Jubilee
and the the province of British Columbia
will former only issued Jubilee in the
nation of Canada you don't have
sovereignty about that as far as I know
but I think that's the best the
commitment I'm signing up for that
that's what I will do and then you've
got the notion of the the trigger and we
can identify the trigger right and
there's many many different constructs
like different versions of what this
game looks like the people have been
experimenting with what's the one that
has the most potency to it but we could
just say a simple trigger is that we say
when you know a million people have
signed up we'll do it or 38 million then
you have the payload and the payload
that gets very interesting the payload
you can actually drop this is where the
nurturing piece gets lit up you can drop
a lot of other stuff so that the basic
payload is the Jubilee specific Jubilee
commitment that's like that's the point
of the spear that's the thing that
activates it but I can put other stuff
in for example I could put in a
universal basic income so one of the
things that will happen when you
activate the Jubilee is that all fear
currency will evaporate in the matter of
days for the same reason if what you
just talked about banking like something
like 98% we modeled about 98 percent of
fiat currency and now includes by the
way China I didn't at the time it didn't
include time but now includes everybody
here in Switzerland will it will
evaporate within a week well okay that's
problem but what we do is everybody gets
fifty thousand dollars in their account
in new money immediately
so jubilee we always sign up for the
jubilee immediately we issue a new
people's currency that is no longer
associated with with the banking system
and its fifty thousand dollars in the
account of everybody who signs up
everybody who's everybody who has an
account and if you create thing kind of
get renewing and fifteen hundred dollars
a month in universal basic income which
will increase by some rate every month
up until it's I believe the number that
it looked like we could get it up to was
eight thousand a month in about fifteen
years and by the way like stable like
it's very very it's not just a little
stable it's the opposite of unstable it
actually makes the system more stable to
do it that way
the there are other other payloads the
one that was the most interesting we had
to do with health care like how do you
actually put health care into a
community contact but you get the idea
right there's a you want to explore
there's a machinery the machinery has a
certain set of characteristics and the
key is they would have dozens that
actually it disrupts the Nash
equilibrium because it creates it
creates a game Theo theoretic defection
strategy that everybody who is a
maximally sociopathic financier must
follow which is just to say passed at
some epsilon pass some minimum number of
people who are signing up for this
Jubilee there's some probability that it
will actually come to pass in different
jurisdictions so maybe it's more likely
in Argentina and Greece than it is in in
Canada but okay that's what it is
and what happens is is that as you begin
to have to calculate that probability of
Jubilee into the financial calculus this
has the characteristic of destabilizing
the currency and in
creasing interest rates for those places
where the sensitivity is the highest
which causes actually a series of
cascade effects which we actually saw in
the European consequences of member the
2008 American financial crisis had a
cascade effect that finally showed up in
actually show up everywhere but we saw
it really put nearly break things in
Europe that's was we were as we were
building this model we were actually in
real time being able to watch that and
reverse model it so you can design it so
that there's this like a diamond clear a
very small impact cascades through the
system and it creates a what's called a
race effect I think very similar to you
have in mind around patents by the way
you can build a similar system for
patents where two things happen
simultaneously the average person so the
person who isn't an early adopter who
isn't coming in with a lot of
consciousness about here's what I want
to do begins to realize that it's just a
better choice to join this activity and
so that beginning to get an acceleration
of more and more people joining and then
here's the thinness the most powerful is
the quote unquote smart money your
maximally extractive financier begins to
race for the exits they begin to see
that this the the game a is actually
coming to an end and so their race for
the exit moves you into a such a
hyperbolic growth rate so what ends up
happening is you'll see the the ticker
like imagine you just have a ticker that
says number of people signing up for
Jubilee today and it's like a thousand
fifty thousand two hundred thousand the
ticker is going up and the the
consequence is like the material
consequences in the financial
environment is pretty flat pretty flat
pretty flat little curve done like in
maybe weeks possibly so this is one of
the things that we actually develop in
the OG game be are how does game be use
its capacities to generate asymmetric
competition al Qaeda wears out competing
asymmetric competition to game a and the
Jubilee was like the very first one and
the one that we really spent
dialing and watching because it's
obviously financial capitalism is the
center of financial is the center of
financial capitalism and it's hyper
hyper fragile we trace the threads of
all the different causal structures like
politics politics is deeply deeply sub
coordinated to money right now in some
sense always has been but particularly
now and so trying to do work at the
political level doesn't really have a
lot of traction because you're you're
also going to play in the wrong game you
think you're playing the political game
it's actually a money game and you're
not playing the money game and money's
playing the money game so switch okay
okay let's do something which is a hyper
politics that money doesn't understand
that disrupts money which then reopens
the possibility of doing regular
politics in a different in different
modality isn't it just a game a reset
though that would be a game a reset
exactly but you because the code the
payload can be whatever you want the
payload to be you can you can does this
is in fact exactly at this pivot point
is where the original thing we were
doing became game B which was I had been
assigned a particular task called deep
code of doing asking the deep question
and doing a lot of the analysis and what
I came out came out with was exactly you
said which was okay this this would
definitely work in the sense they would
definitely rigged the system in fact
it's kind of easy like this well the
game theory is they're like we could
probably pull this off ourselves and in
12 months this is before by the way like
blockchain existed all really like the
consciousness that money was something
that the people could just decide to
build but if he but if we don't have a
context we don't have actually a thing
that can hold that energy and so it will
Rico here around a kind of a next stage
of game a and it'll be a better one in
just the same way that the the world we
live in right now is a better world in
the world of the 13th century but it has
two really bad negative characteristics
one is it has a very short half-life it
will accelerate to collapse in probably
15 years
just in Peru hum and to in the meantime
it will continue to consume complexity
at a hyper accelerated rate so that
won't work but that's not that's
actually not a stable solution
it's a be kind of fun because you get to
blow things up and that there's there's
you know Fight Club was a nice fun movie
but it's not a stable solution so we
have to actually get into thinking about
game B and so that was that so then we
started talking looking at the the
directionality of what's the other side
like what's what's on the other side the
Looking Glass which for me was a pretty
massive undertaking meaning I had to
actually become a different person to
actually be able to ID completely and
become a different kind of kind of
person and a different person and this
in this conversation is where the rival
risks non-rivalry Santo Alvarez
distinction started to really become
important because the the essence of why
it is that what you're talking about is
true has to do with the leverage and
power of the anti rival risk both at the
subjective level an anti rivals
disposition cooperation and medical
operation and at the objective level the
kinds of things tech that have the most
generative capacity and the sync between
them that well many hands make light
work is true so if we're trying to plant
the fields and grow corn more people as
helpful the leverage off of that level
of cooperation it's just a lot lot less
than inventing zero-point energy like
it's just they're not the same category
and the realization that almost everyone
is working at roughly less than 15% of
what would be possible as individuals
and that that reduces collaborative
capacity to around 1% of what would be
possible which is massive if you begin
to realize that if we judge
shifted a few things you to unlock
something like five to a hundred
thousand X generative capacity in the
anti reverse domain which has
exponential feedback no obviously that's
this is where we're nodding I should
mention though that there was two things
so I think I'm almost done with my
diatribe I apologize for no this is very
interesting I'm loving this
two things that came out of that working
were very important one was transparency
is not a mono is not a monoculture of
eret virtue transparency has to be
symmetric with wisdom because otherwise
you get asymmetric capacity without
asymmetric competence this is the
ability to give a a child to Ghana for
example the one that I'm most familiar
with actually is when I was young to be
a hacker you actually didn't know your
 like you you yourself knew how to
do it and what you might do is you might
write software that made it easier for
you to do the thing that you do how to
do but once she wrote the software
somebody who didn't know how to do it
could use the software to do this to do
to do the thing we called them script
kitties and and this is not to say by
the way that somebody who is a hacker
had the moral wisdom to actually be
symmetric to the power but at least they
had the competence to be symmetric to
the power when he started getting into
the script kiddies you started getting
you know teenagers who had ability to do
so distributed to now service attacks on
botnets that they didn't build that was
equivalent of like state intelligence
agencies CRISPR like your for me was
CRISPR cast nine no because I keep
trying to look it up and it doesn't make
sense all right keep it doesn't generate
on Google it actually is Wow
I think so it's um science real good
very powerful and it has the you have
the ability to actually change the the
genotype in cells quickly
reliably and predictably and you can
actually deliver our desired results
so it's like genetic engineering the way
they describe genetic engineering back
in the 80s it's the actual thing and I
believe they're actually it yeah yeah
it's it's been it's been out now for
more than a decade it's being used can
they do it alt they can do it in there
they have been able to do it in in vivo
so they can do it in living cells they
have not been able to get get it to do
it in somatic non stem cells so I
couldn't give it to you just now but
they're working on it right and there's
good reason to believe that it's totally
doable and in fact there's good reason
believe the Chinese and MEC actually
have done it but they haven't told me
about it but even if you're not doing it
in humans a human adult's you could say
for example do it in viruses and
bacteria easily enough and so that's a
big deal
I the way of thinking about it is that
the the kinds of German warfare that
only the United States and the Soviet
Union could deliver on in the 20th
century will will be available to a
person with a PhD in biology in about
five years but a PhD in biology does not
deliver the moral wisdom to not kill
everybody delivers the asymmetric
capacity to use it because unfortunately
we don't get how to deal with it so what
happens is is that when you when you
activate this capacity for creative
collaboration you're gonna have to be
very careful if taking into account the
negatives that will come with the
positives we will get for sure massive
increases in capacity it has to actually
we have to actually be thought about
building symmetry incompetence or
symmetry and wisdom with power otherwise
we will in fact for short kill ourselves
because it just takes a few bad actors
or if you just make mistake yeah that's
scary
yeah so the same see this is a big thing
like we spent a like I as somebody who
my background was technology
entrepreneur had a built-in bias towards

just do it dick try it it probably fail
anyway if it works you know
awesome it'll be fun had to like sit
down and really look through the math
and look through the logic and realize
that the proofs to bidding put up were
certain life it wasn't there's no
ambiguity it is for sure the case that
it is existential it kills everybody and
not that while like less than a decade
if you get these triggers right so it
sort of this thing's like shoot we can't
actually trigger game B at real scale
until we've actually figured out how to
do it so that people get it's like a
guild an old-fashioned medieval guild
system you get access to certain levels
of what we know as you have havin
yourself embodied a which is wisdom
I just embodied wisdom just the ability
to make good choices with the things
you've been given it's not it's not that
mysterious like we actually it's it's a
thing that is that we know we've seen
people who are wise and we know that
they're wise people who don't make
foolish reckless thoughtless choices
don't necessary make good choices but
they're careful not to make choices at
all if they're if they're concerned
about whether or not it's gonna be a
good choice they'll ask for help or
counsel and we'll go slowly enough to
make those choices and that's what are
they characteristics quiz them so that's
one side that's one piece and so two
degree in which you're moving forward
with what you're doing be thoughtful
about that be thoughtful about how you
can actually say as we move into
transparency how do we build things so
that there's a at the center really is
maturity at the center is development
humans and wholeness of human you don't
want asymmetry and human development you
don't want people who are like really
high IQ and low EQ for example you want
to be able to make sure that as people
are moving into this the whole their
wholeness the whole person is is
received into place and all the aspects
of themselves are receiving to pay it
plays and you can imagine there's lots
of reasons for that because one of the
reasons why people actually do bad
things is because some part of them is
rebelling that's some interior aspect
that is not heard in in themselves so
the whole of the person and person
themselves has to actually come in
relationship
to hold themselves and then as they do
that this by the way as it turns out so
this is the other side the second piece
of it so the first in the second piece
that I was going to say dated they link
it's actually the secret sauce that how
you unlock creative collaboration anyway
it's what prevents me from being able to
truly truly creatively collaborate with
you is like a lot of noise in my
interior parts of me that don't want to
hear you because they project on you or
want to control what's happening in the
relationship or parts of me to just want
to you know just or immature and one it
will engage in immature activities or
parts of me to get hurt and then have
immature defense responses that that's
what really truly gets in the way at the
inner small group level obviously
there's systemic stuff that happens
outside of that but you can just a group
of seven flies apart because the people
who are showing up the the amount of say
what's like like an inverse-square law
mmm sorry the repulsive force the
centripetal force of the the noise that
happens when individuals are not deeply
in integrity and healed and mature means
that as the energy in the grouping
increases you get almost getting a
square law and which causes the
repulsive force to fly apart this is
where things break down this is where I
collaborate with other people ends up
being really really challenging beyond
any small number were small like dyads
you can get examples of dyad part die
attic partnerships that just fit very
very well creatively and they can do
amazing things and and can find ways to
work through the tension triads are
really hard
quads nearly impossible over a long
period of time it's just the complexity
of the relationship so as it turns out
these two pieces fit nicely that the
answer to the problem of how do we
actually enable this sea change in
creative collaboration involves an
exterior
texts shift so all the various
parameters and constraints on choice
that shape why we make the choices from
the outside like rules of ownership and
equity and things like that and then
interior shifts that enabled the end
what I've been calling sovereignty like
that's what the word sovereignty came
from naming that naming what it means
for individuals to step into a wholeness
of self and an increase in capacity to
be in like open vulnerable responsive
relationship with other people as
somebody is supported in their becoming
whole they also are increasingly
incapable venturing into creative
collaboration but they're also
increasingly mature and therefore can
can actually be entrusted with more
power because they'll actually be more
capable of making better choices by the
way this as far as I can tell really
interesting step functions like it's not
a linear thing there's certain things
where the amount of power the asymmetry
of power means that your choice making
capacity has to be quite high before you
cross into that threshold like I can I
wouldn't be a shoe I would not trust
myself with the keys to crisper cast 10
for example that I wouldn't trust to
have anybody who I know except for like
six people who are quite remarkable by
the way it's quite palpable when you
encounter somebody who is that level of
embodied wisdom mmm-hmm yeah no I think
those are all very important factors
the issue is game a is run by sociopaths
and they have the power and they have
the keys and science done behind locked
doors is not in any way guarantee that
these things are in place in any way
shape or form oh no and so collectively
having transparency when I'm talking
about transparency I don't mean crisper
transparency I mean transparency in the
board of directors of the tech company I
mean where money comes from and where it
goes what
decisions were making to our members
towards complete sparrin see yes yeah
since making it needs to be fully
transparent and so part of that is I
mean I think a simple version of what
you're talking about
that is available right now is this
debate on gun laws and you know that we
need to have stricter gun laws because
of what's happening in the United States
and although intellectually I support
that we're also at a point in technology
where you can 3d print a gun and so this
evolution it in consciousness so people
don't want to kill each other you know
we have no solution for that yeah
knowing people and putting laws in place
and not dealing with you know mental
health and and just like our personal
autonomy being hurt chicken bean or a
group of human beings and we feel that
is where our power lies that's what we
need to be dealing with and we're not
able to deal with that in our current
system at all and so I'd rather have a
system of transparency of you know if
we're doing something like voting
whether to fund a project like CRISPR
part of it is inherent in the system is
looking at what could go wrong what why
would this be positive and why would
this be negative and we're not just
throwing out things I mean my background
is actually in genetics it's what I have
my bachelor's and it's not PhD but I
don't have to worry about this yet no
GMOs don't when they first I was like
yeah they sound great awesome like we're
solving all these problems and then
looking into the science of it I was
like but we don't understand it we're
you know breaking things into their
components putting them out into the
world in a way that they can just
reproduce this is not and it's done for
profit right and there you are deciding
whether it's ethical and that's in no
way a solution and so at least with
transparent science collectively we
understand that we don't want GMOs
necessarily or at least not GMOs on a
massive scale without them also being
tested first right like the positive and
the negative
well we need to feed the masses can we
feed the masses without GMOs yes can we
you know can we create GMOs that don't
require heavy amounts of pesticides or
don't kill our guts or don't that
involves testing that involves not you
know creating massive fields of it
because I have a patents on this this
genetic material right so I don't know
if what I'm talking about solves in any
way the CRISPR problem or the AI problem
because there's always gonna be the
possibility of somebody creating
something in their garage and not not
asking for permission from the group but
part of it is in the transparency having
conversations about I am all for not
having a punishment in any way shape or
form that we have now but certain things
that are life-ending
like creating a nuclear bomb here in you
know creating a human being from scratch
like certain things that are like these
cannot be done by individuals they feel
fat mean except yes thatwe need to have
some kind of repercussion that we've
laid out it's like right is it worth the
Eureka moments as a scientist to come to
AI to come to CRISPR if it also means
you're living your life in prison for
the end zone like I live in that space
here's the here's the gift that projects
like yours can give and it's the inverse
of that Nash there's people at Google
who who are working on their AI team who
are fully aware of the risks but
unfortunately are also fully aware the
fact that the context that they're in is
a race to the bottom game theory meaning
if they don't do it then the Chinese
will or whoever most right now is the
Chinese in Google who are kind of racing
even if they slow down it doesn't really
slow down the whole story much oh cheese
that we would even do that because it's
you have to actually build an
alternative and it's like okay here's if
we can get this thing moving and
actually create a context where there's
a way for people to as individuals to
attach some things that they know are
not good and there's an answer for how
we can actually get you know people who
are mutually pointing guns at each other
to put
then they will like people will actually
step into it and so here's like from the
middle out and it feels like you're kind
of that's where you orient maybe is what
are the things that we can do now what
are the kind of low-hanging fruit kind
of simple things that we can do now that
are embedding the right whole system in
the code and that I think is what I was
trying to convey is is that as you're
doing this it's it's as far as I can
tell quite important to be thinking
about the whole system dynamics and
doing it from the beginning up so for
example how it's actually the question I
asked I think on the game B form just to
me a couple hours ago how do we curate
game B projects like what are the
criteria that would indicate to us that
a given team is the individuals involved
have done enough to be making good
choices at least endeavoring to make
good choices that the project itself is
you know it's ask the right questions I
think the questions have been asked me
and it's being approached in a
thoughtful fashion and there's a sense
that the the project is happening in a
context or as part of a vision that is
itself in alignment meaning like you
said like you're what you're doing is is
not you don't want to do what you're
doing and then sell it to people like no
no I'm doing this and if I can get other
people to be doing similar related
allied things around me there's a whole
thing that shifts in the context it can
be very it can be something very small
like it's like a couple of people say
hey I want to figure how to build a new
kind of coffee shop where it's a co-op
and so the baristas are actually making
a better truly income a true lifestyle
income out of the economics of the
coffee shop you might look at it and say
okay
that makes sense I got you thought this
through I think the structure you've put
in place looks like it could potentially
work and you're doing it in a context of
really being able to think about how
this could play a role you know how does
this thing this new place play a role in
you as a meeting ground for their
community people are coming to this
coffee shop we're actually going to
redefine the notion of people having
say shoots with each other in this place
and with the tenor of everything like
the like we we have actually
relationships with the growers where the
growers are part of the coop there's a
direct continuity like the whole thing
is really okay that's well thought
through it's part of the fabric of the
future that you can see how this is part
of the pieces can start to connect like
the mesh begins to connect up and the
individuals who are thinking it they've
actually stepped up their high horse
they've done they've become the people
it's intended to they've done the work
to at least mostly moving direction
becoming the people think say okay game
be project you're in you're somehow in a
place where we can begin to support you
in in some fashion you can imagine many
many different fashions right you could
say in the post crypto World Cup game be
currency and you may have very simple
like a co-op that is a medic co-op and
one of the characteristics is that
everybody who joins the medic coop buys
game be currency so it begins to have
value and they endeavour to work with
and interact with and part and buy from
service providers who have been curated
have been selected this sort of hit the
criteria and we even have multiple
different stages so I can come in not
quite know what I'm doing them stage one
and if I like work with Joe certain
people and upgrade what I'm doing I can
become say Stage five and resources can
flow in that context why go there sorry
I'm trying to ramble I apologize my
brain does I do have a an option both in
what I'm doing
this is like where I'm starting because
it's been my capacity and it's essential
for any project we create together and I
think it can also be used in the game be
space and I'm kind of working on it with
Philip and Christian to see about
implementing it on this I knew that
Christians the one who owns owns the
zoom coffee shop and Philips one of the
people I know on through game be on
Twitter and Facebook isn't I I don't
know what the zoom coffee shop is Oh
Twitter the 24-hour yeah you can just it
was amazing for the first week because
you'd go in and have these amazing
conversations and then the energy
hated because you'd go in and there
wouldn't be people there so you have to
wait for a couple hours and maybe
someone who join you right so it needed
it needs context it needs a timeline and
his schedule to make it function and
have those conversations yep and that is
what I'm proposing is I came across this
concept called the World Cafe in the
springtime do you know what a cafe is I
do and so I am looking to create a
platform around that method that isn't
for necessarily game B it's for anyone
to come and have a conversation around a
meaningful question with the threshold
of users made so in the beginning people
there's one quite you're not asking
infinite questions but as the capacity
builds were able to focus on more niche
areas but the idea is a lot of what
happens on regular social media which is
this division and this debate and a lot
of trolling because you never see
someone face-to-face and you never
connect with their their energy and it
you know this platform down where I you
know the president's tweeting out to
millions of people you know like there's
that what's the word influencer right
like you have a hundred thousand
subscribers so you have more say than
somebody else not based on your idea not
based on the merit of what you're saying
just because you're you because you have
some kind of celebrity Ness to you and
or you got on the technology right away
where that's always seems to be a lot
easier to gain to gain those that
advantage so anyone can come on say when
they're available in a 24 hour period
and on the half an hour marks they're
matched with three to four other people
to have a conversation and they can have
one conversation they can have 20
conversations in a row and in that way
the larger group is also able to have a
conversation sorry this is really good
this is a great idea and so I would say
by the way this is a game B idea yeah
yeah and I think the content doesn't
have to be something that's ostensible
game being yes no no absolutely so I
don't have the ability to create a such
a platform and I don't even know if we
should until we have the threshold of
people to financially back it and just
like passionately back in right like yes
I want to be on that having those
conversations
I think there is that energy and game be
based on the coffee shop and so part of
the issue is you don't know when people
are gonna be there you don't know what
conversations to have because sometimes
you're part of a conversation and
sometimes you're not part of a
conversation that might move game be
forward right you're like no I want it
to be part of that I wanted to decide on
the values together I wanted to so
having what I've proposed is having six
time slots in a 24 hour period so that
one of them works for you and actually
asking one question every 48 hours and
then on the third day harvesting those
conversations to say what were the
common things what are some things we
can glean and put together doing that
twice in a weeks period and then on the
seventh day we generate new questions
and vote on which to work sorry on the
seventh day you rest yeah that's
literally what I've been saying I'm like
and on the seventh day we've rest I'm
like all right we actually generate new
question that's really neat that's
really it's not always clear exactly
what the nature of reality is I've been
wondering over the past couple of days
of why I chose to create that Facebook
thing that I did recently did you see
that which Facebook thing if you go to
my what's it called board or my page
then my personal identity on Facebook I
think two days ago here let me read it
to you it's not very long it'll be easy
to easy to grasp so September 24th at
9:30 a.m. so is that yesterday two days
ago okay so this is what I said
yesterday a notion came to me it seemed
like it might be interesting to try an
experiment in collaborative inquiry so
this is an invitation I see it working
more or less like this first people
endeavoring to present ask the questions
that are quote unquote right ones to ask
right now the most meaningful question
at this moment since we're on Facebook I
imagine this is taking place in the
comments to this post perhaps is a
simple protocol each distinct question
should be its own thread second people
endeavoring to further clarify or deepen
the inquiry this might show up as
asking questions about or in the context
of questions for example as replies to a
given comment it makes sure if simply as
likes to questions or furthering to help
orient attention my guess is that this
piece of the experiment take 2-3 days so
that may not be the case but it actually
kind of looks like it is can you so hear
me yep sweet third finally people at the
very least me might choose to endeavour
to contemplate some question or
questions and write a longer form post
as a result of that contemplation this
likely takes place on Facebook since
longer formative of bust here and then
will be linked back to this post in the
comments this might take at least a week
and maybe much longer
contemplation isn't a straightforward
thing in my experience then finally
doing it again maybe two or three times
to see how the overall competence in
collaborative inquiry develops over
iteration and so that was that thing and
it has produced a very large number of
really good questions like 90 something
like that a lot of people happen to you
where are you have too many tabs I've
lost you there we go okay and I'm not
quite sure where that idea came from
I was just sitting there and also the
idea was in my head more or less fully
formed and it had a strong amount of
energy around it so I had to I had to
express it even though makes a little
bit uncomfortable to do something like
that so perhaps it was actually your
idea and I apologize but perhaps it's
useful because now there's a bunch of
people who were kind of primed to play
this kind of game and a bunch of
questions that are already out there
with proceeding of which one's already
lanta so it could be a very very easy
thing to say hey Jubilee is kicking off
this project already we're gonna be
having these conversations in person
anybody you know Mike great over there
yeah
get off my Facebook page and it's phase
you know the next phase of this thing or
the branch of this thing is beginning
like that could be very not just easy
but frankly it's been helpful for me and
would be enjoyable I think to be part of
the conversations because I think that's
a big part of to me game B needs to be
is it has to be fun to play for the
individual and simple enough that mo
people can participate and the way to
generate the questions is to make them
in a way that anybody could answer them
and nobody has the exact answer at least
in the beginning we were exploring yep
and so there's two things that I would
add to that and there's been pretty
decent of experimentation around this
particular question of inquiry so one is
it's a it's actually quite an
interesting and useful constraint to
require the inquiry deepen before it
stopped being an inquiry by which I mean
we could only ask more questions like
literally as a constraint for the first
30 minutes of this call you cannot say
anything that doesn't end in a question
mark you can't just do the raise your
voice at the end of your sentence
what's the deeper question what's the
deeper question what's the deeper
question there's something about what
that does to the mind that meaningfully
increases people's capacity to be truly
in inquiry like truly curious like if
you just force people to ask questions
for a while their mind shifts into a
curiosity disposition then then when
they enter and when they exit that right
they're still curious and not dogmatic
the second piece is a rotten apple can
spoil the whole bunch
it's you know most people are not very
well trained frankly on how to actually
be in real dialogue with other people
how to listen how to be curious many
people default to a certain even as I
did in our call desire to express things
that they have inside them because we're
done if it's really heard and so there's
really just two solutions to that one is
structural like the one I just gave in
terms you could just have constraints
and say ask questions first for the
first hour or have a facilitator who's
moderating and managing the human
dynamics that are going on or you have
to have some kind of filter where people
who just aren't capable of really
participating in the culture things
aren't there like there
there they're not not empowered to
disrupt and it's for real like there's
just it shows up constantly and any any
effort to do this kind of thing meaning
things like even if you have even if you
have meaningful facilitators it can
still be challenging so I sent you two
things on Facebook one of which is my
documents on what I was talking about on
a communication platform with game B
specifically of like how it could work
the other one is I actually have a
youtube channel that I'm using for what
I'm calling the idea Cafe which is the
platform for having a collaborative
conversation that at least in essence
works because it's a YouTube channel so
like we're doing it live and there's a
lot of like vulnerability that goes with
that that isn't going to be accessible
to everyone but the point will be and
we'll be using zoom or other existing
technology so we don't have to recreate
the wheel just like connecting people to
those zoom calls once we have our you
know preliminary beta platform but it's
looking at the structure of one
conversation so it's like three to five
people you each take turns answering the
questions so one person isn't
monopolizing the time and even if you're
you know coming from a space of anger if
projected at the people there you're
still like done at the end of five
minutes and that's still an experience
that the group has the other amazing
aspect of breaking off into these
smaller groups is that you can't derail
the entire conversation you can only
derail a tiny conversation that is P a
piece of the bigger hole so it's a lot
harder for one person to monopolize at
all or one energy to take you know like
even if you're going to monopolize the
conversation and not follow the rules
and not listen for understanding you can
only reckon verse a ssin and yeah he's
truly wrecking it when then that group
gets to learn from that experience be
like we don't like that how do we
mitigate against that in the future
possibly asking the person who did it
right what because I know I interrupt
people and sometimes monopolize the
conversation that's why I like defining
like I know I have five minutes to
answer the question that's it like
boundary that I am comfortable with
versus even if I'm not done at the end
of five minutes yeah
yeah that's good there's a great because
we're eight structural elements so and
there's a interesting as you say that
could my assumption my sense is that
you're proposing is there's an iterative
learning process where as you go into
I'm part of a conversation it's a bad
conversation is destroyed the invitation
is to say hey what's the feedback that
you might have on how to improve this
process so that I'm not disempowered and
basically just say these guys I'm
out of here but actually man I really
wanted to have a good conversation if we
can find some way to solve it you're
familiar with open space not I no open
source I don't know I don't know if in
space so World Cafe is one process
there's as many maybe maybe 50 open
space is another that's quite well
understood and good and it's cross
fertilization can be dynamic
facilitation that might also be helpful
and frankly some of the innovators like
literally the people who invented these
processes are on that Facebook threads
that I created for example an open space
happens is pretty similar action there's
a question and the phrase they say is
whoever shows up or the ones who are
supposed to be there there was an
invitation here's a question here's an
invitation show if you want that's
really actually very helpful filter if
it's not if it's in a compelling
question you just don't show up cool
then it and then people are spread out
into rooms like you sort of randomly
move people into small group
conversations and the rule of the
conversation is vote with your feet so
you are not in open space you're not
obligated to stay in the room you can
leave the room and go back to the common
area you can't go to another room you
can go to the common area and so you
know if I if I am in a station with five
people one person is monopolizing the
conversation I can just leave and as it
turns out social signaling is very
powerful if I'm in operating the
conversation literally everybody just
gets up and leaves I kind of have
learned something very deep and
fundamental I mean it you know figured
out how to solve the problem but I know
there's a problem and then those people
can go back to the common area and once
there's a critical mass of people in the
common area they can form a new group
and the flow of people go in and you
kind of say okay it's going to be 30
minutes in each room and people flow
and you get this really interesting
organic movement and over a period of
time the question gets very very richly
considered I know some people who are
just flat-out experts in that dynamic if
you'd be interested in chatting with
them and I think they're pretty generous
of spirit so they'd be willing to share
what they know absolutely interested in
chatting with them I love that idea
one of my friends Daniel introduced me a
little bit like that in the real world
space I think he called it circles which
is not like circling that the game be
talks about but I love that idea I don't
know how it would work on a platform
where it's like the global the World
Cafe I know more like having one
question for a 24-hour period but
playing with that and seeing what we can
create together because the World Cafe
could be done on Zoom and a very simple
platform and then saying you know as I
was thinking more breaking off into like
the climate change group has a question
for the day but having it so anyone can
generate a question and then you have
the people who are interested in it I
don't know how that works with time
zones as part of it is having a global
conversation you're saying I'm available
at this time for this question but maybe
you could create it like I have said for
six different time slots and form it
around that and so it's not like the
idea for the platform was it was going
to be 24/7 but how do you get the
threshold of people there to make that
interesting conversation so you're
breaking off into groups and then this
idea showed up if like well that for a
global population one of these time
periods is gonna work for you and you
know you have 48 hours to come on for
one by the way I think there's something
there's actually a formal rule around
what you did there and 24 24 to 6 shoot
think of it maybe you know you're doing
design of this sort it's useful to
actually be able to do meta design just
to have an understanding of what are the
kinds of moves they can resolve category
problems what is it
nature does this a lot ah shoot and well
we'll come back but there's something
about that like partitioning a an
analogue space 24 hours into a set of
smaller spaces that renormalize is you
can get the criticality to hit in this
in the slots yeah so I mean it seems to
me like the the key is just to have a
learning begin to play find a way to put
people who are energized skillful people
in to do it there's a lot of cool folks
I did you know Joe Edelman steam and
burn at Berlin no good heavens man
they're amazing and crazy but we're
gonna do and he was rubber gee he was
actually part of the original game be
and went off into his clown world and I
don't mean that in any sort of negative
sense I mean I quit early actually
they've got a whole universe now of
games that they play in active play like
one of them is to say it's like a values
game game one is a game where you learn
how learning cure values are like one of
my by is to say tell the truth or
respect other people and so that game
kind of gets that surfaced the second
game is an active play where for a
period of time I had to consciously do
the exact opposite of the things that I
thought were my explicit values so I
have to lie just lie lie lie I have to
be rude rude as a
right and this thing happens where you
actually begin to realize oh my gosh
that actually wasn't my value like my
value is actually something deeper and
slightly different but locked into the
box I didn't think about it live like
they did maybe 300 games and a very
thoughtful about the notion of how a
ludic behavior how playfulness opens up
capacities actually having a
conversation with two of them next week
and you can imagine a
cross-fertilization whereas the
conversation if two or three of the
people from that group get involved in
the creative process the creative
collaboration of you're calling a World
Cafe or idea Cafe a World Cafe is the
cons is someone else's concept that I'm
creating idea Cafe is both my YouTube
channel and the placeholder name for the
platform we're gonna create together
idea got it yeah
Khepri yeah yeah I think I think I've
met the lady who did World Cafe once
Vanessa my wife studied that whole area
for a little while to get a handle on it
we're we're kmv players we met in that
context nice
so our baby is a game B baby although
she doesn't know right there to be a
collaborator more like B you no one else
could be you and you're getting really
good at it by the way I'm really
appreciating how good how you you are
and and your child's name is peanut
peanut Briscoe its Aurora Aurora okay
well my grandfather's Nick for nickname
for me was peanut which is why it like
touch me yeah so that sounds neat it
sounds like you're gonna be doing
something that will be fun there will be
I imagine that it has real potential and
even if if it if Peters out it will have
petered out really really useful and it
seems like it's plausible to poor people
in that direction who are they'll play
with you and it'll come out real
collaboration I can from the middle as
opposed to thinking about it just begin
doing it and seeing what works and what
doesn't work yes for me by the way it
was depressing as hell back in 2012 to
find that there were almost no real
collaborators out there it's amazing now
to find it in just seven years it's a
lot a lot of people who have on their
own come to these these places and are
bringing really amazing insight and
energy in capacity and heart ya know I
love this space I mean game B is a whole
other level and having an interaction
with this community but even on Twitter
finding the odd people like REMS Eve
through the common planet it was in game
B and the difference between wanting to
succeed together and beating competition
is night and day like I'm like joke with
him I'm like who's gonna save the planet
first like it's like you know even when
you're in competition you're not in
competition because you like ya want to
help each other's prod
you want to sign up for each other's
project be like whoever gets there first
awesome well you know and the funny
thing is he actually had the same
realization that his project common
planet is a Jubilee press like oh yeah
I'm like I'm loving my name right now
this is like what I was put here to do
it's a big one because I didn't name
myself but it seems to be embodied in
what I am here to do in my in my mission
so yeah that's beautiful I'm gonna stop
recording okay
and this broadcast and