all right hi everyone and welcome to
another awaken from the meeting crisis
to score Q&A we've got a little bit of a
different model here tonight our very
own NIC B is here to give us a chat
about his story and what he's learned
from his time in cult
so as we're sort of talking about
forming and figuring out what the
religion that's not a religion my play
why it's important for to learn from
from the mistakes of the mistakes of
others so NIC is has a lot of experience
in in cults and he's lots of mistakes
mistakes generously gonna tell us all
about it so thanks welcome dick thank
you so so we're gonna do it a little bit
of a different format today so Nick's
gonna start off
he has three sections to his
presentation so at the end of each
section if you have questions on that
section now you can ask them then if you
have questions just about cults in
general or the topic in general then if
you could queue them up in the event
text like we normally do for these
things and again if you want me to read
out your question please let me know
that you you want me to read it out so
with that I will turn it over to Nick
wonderful
I will briefly add I was asked to do
this as opposed to wanting to
indoctrinate everybody into my specific
take on cults so I expect some amount of
disagreement here but hopefully it is it
is nonetheless useful the layout that I
have is initially going over my personal
history and the cultic groups that I
have participated in from there I want
to do a brief a brief kind of
exploration of the etymology of the word
cult and it's kind of used through time
and how that's changed quite
dramatically particularly in in the 20th
century I then I'm going to add pose
what I've kind of my own sense making
and how I've gone about kind of
integrating these experiences and a
little bit of an alternative framing
around the concept of a cult and then
the final section is going over
you know what the necessary features are
in the systems we we normally view as as
cultic and then how the there's kind of
good and bad versions of these things
and how things can kind of end up on a
slippery slope of moving into these
unhealthier forms and that's probably
where where hopefully there will be the
most actual use as far as like ideas of
develop and a written are and that kind
of stuff are
yeah so I guess
launch right into it I've been in rather
I've interacted with four cults one of
which I joined consciously it advertised
itself as a cult and that was the most
recent one I had experienced
so yeah my very first experience with
dealing with kind of overtly or
classically cultic systems was when I
was about 19 my friend and I were quite
disillusioned with the status quo life
we were living of working at Starbucks
and trying to have our pseudo
spirituality developing on the side and
so we made a rather radical decision to
take up the woofing program that's
worldwide opportunities on organic farms
it's basically a Craigslist ad type set
up of organic farms that are able to put
up ads or classifieds for opportunities
to work with them any sort of trade it
could be just living and food you know
room and board they could pay you right
it's all there and then they give a
description of of their specific farm
and a lot of this was in the effort of
trying to learn from farming or
permaculture skills so that we could
basically create our own cult and the
specific ad we ended up choosing had
advertised itself as a type of
meditation center and retreat with an
emphasis on organic farming it was on
the Big Island of Hawaii out in an area
called or the town is called Pahoa and
the area is called Puna
it is a pretty wild place it's the area
that tourists go to see the active
volcano flow out there and the whole
areas under constant threat of being
wiped out by the volcano as recent as
the 80s it took out a huge town and
wiped out the highway out there and as a
side effect no insurance companies will
will protect any of the land or
buildings out there and none of the
utility companies will put out new lines
or anything so there's very little
actual electricity all the
infrastructure was built before the 80s
and most of people's water functions off
of water catchment that area is
considered the wettest area in the world
there's a specific valley in that area
that gets over 600 inches of rainfall a
year
yeah so it's it it it's an area of of
the u.s. that attracts people that are
very much trying to live under the radar
for one reason or another whether that
be they're very bizarre efforts to live
an alternative life or their effort to
dodge some legal issues that they had so
many false identities over there many
people with some very interesting
histories and then many people doing
some some very bizarre experimental
cultural projects so when we showed up
you know we had our backpacks we had no
car transportation we were pretty deeply
not even very much you know very little
money so we were very dependent on the
scenario that we were entering to just
meet our daily needs needs of food and
lodging and it became immediately
apparent on the car ride to the property
that we were going to be staying at that
we were not dealing with just this kind
of open-ended Meditation Center but
rather a very specific form of a
meditation center and that was
communicated by the constant whispering
we heard of a repeating mantra under the
car full of people's breath that was
taking us there and they were they were
reciting the Harry Krishna mantra
this was a Harry Krishna cult and the
Harry Krishna's as a larger group have
been identified as at least being cultic
if not overtly a cult the specific setup
that we were participating in most would
agree is like a pretty classically
cultic setup and we were on a on a
smaller part of the farm or a part of
the community and you know it started
off with the indoctrination type methods
pretty pretty upfront often
rationalizing most of our taking in it
on a kind of pragmatic basis of like you
know well you don't have to believe
everything but start trying our
practices start repeating this mantra
constantly and see what it does for you
two other people had shown up the day
before me and my friend had arrived and
under similar pretexts and a similar
mission of just kind of randomly heading
out to find some people that were doing
something different than the norm and we
ended up becoming very close with them
I don't want to spend too much time
running through all these cults so I'm
trying to figure out which parts are the
important parts to communicate here we
heard lots of stories basically that
when new people showed up they would put
on a very nice welcoming face and then
when people you know we're more
committed or or new people had given up
and left they would take on a much more
authoritarian stance and very harshly
r√©giment people's lives and that were
there and everything also on Saturdays
we were taken to a connecting farms set
up and this was kind of a the actual hub
of the Harry Krishna's within that area
I was a very large group they owned tens
of thousands of acres they ran all
different types of farms you know there
was probably upwards of five to six
hundred members of this particular
branch and then they all had kind of
subdivisions where they would have they
would build around a specific person's
house or or whatever but the main guy
running the whole thing his title or
name which is clearly not his real name
was Garuda and on Saturdays they'd have
a big party where they would do the
chanting and dance that is very common
to the Krishna branch of Hinduism
it's basically a form of devotional
dance where they would all recite the
mantra man I can't remember what the
name of the damn word is for singing
mantras
that's frustrating and then they would
invite large groups of very random
people often people they just collected
off the street as they were hit trying
to hitchhike in the area or drug addicts
or or whatever and they would offer them
a free meal and then the partake in the
dance and this was one of the main
mechanisms by which they gathered new
new people
many of these people being too
incapacitated to actually leave the area
as it's very hard to get around out
there without a car Garuda's farm had I
don't actually know the full number of
people
[Music]
probably between fifty and a hundred it
was hard to keep track of how many
people there actually were working
because the property was so large and
the farm was so large that you couldn't
quite keep track of everyone that was
participating in it but basically he had
people work in twelve plus hour days six
days a week working this farm that they
would sell the produce at a farm stand
in the area
all of them collected food stamps from
from the state which in Hawaii was about
three hundred dollars a month and then
they would all donate their food stamps
to the group so there was very little
overhead for the people to participate
there other than having some kind of
very basic level of lodging I was I was
sleeping under a tarp during this period
it's actually interesting we left the
people we were with because it was
creeping us out after about two weeks
and we moved to a neighboring part that
was still within the Krishna's set up
but was way less hands-on it was a noni
farm I don't know if anyone knows what
noni fruit is but it is a horrifyingly
disgusting fruit that is often marketed
as some type of extreme superfood and
sells for a very high premium smells
like stomach acid or bile so there we
slept in a abandoned School Bus on the
farm property and and you know we'd go
and do our four hours of work a day
largely just collecting the bags that
lord knows how many random workers were
collecting off the trees all day long I
mean that the territory that we drove to
collect these bags was was enormous
often with many kind of temporary
structures randomly placed throughout
the farms for for the workers to live in
that was also under garuda saying but
not his actual residence
yeah so this was the initial kind of
interfacing with these alternative
groups it was very clear and I was very
uncomfortable I was coming from a deeply
individualist and you know coming just
recently coming out of a very strong
atheistic phase through my teenage years
and was kind of opening my mind to
spiritual practices without the
metaphysics largely
so yeah whoo we did not get along with
the people there I often would would
bring up arguments and and start kind of
philosophical debates in the middle of
their their practices and eventually
that's how we ended up at the farm the
farm ended up being too much eventually
and we moved out of the farm and
actually rented a cabin from the guy
that owned all the monetary resources
for this whole group who also had rumors
of murdering two people the dramas in
Pahoa had were like normal dramas but
like blown out times ten or a hundred
just like in little interpersonal
struggles where like extraordinarily
dramatic I've told some of these stories
before
yes so basically we saw what they were
doing we saw him we clearly didn't fit
in with the situation and we're creating
quite a bit of friction and at the same
time it was really interesting talking
to a lot of these people and getting to
know them and hearing their life stories
because so many of them were were you
know people with heavy mental disorders
or extreme drug addicts or you know
otherwise very damaged people that were
able to find honestly what was not a bad
path of life for them that kept them
sober kept them from you know diving
further into their psychosis in this in
this cultic format of largely giving
over responsibility for their life in
their labour and their you know monetary
responsibilities and all these types of
things so immediately we could kind of
see that while this wasn't something we
wanted to do there was certainly a
distinct gray area where we could
acknowledge that sound bits of this were
pretty creepy and yet it also seemed to
be legitimately helping a lot of these
people so yeah we eventually moved out
one of the two people that had moved in
before us had a car that he was
borrowing from his friend that lived on
the island so we had some amount of
mobility the group of the four of us was
three guys and one girl when we moved
out to this very remote location by the
way it was it was a shack in about a
mile deep into the jungle ten miles from
the town so you went out on the main
highway out there until you hit a sign
that said end of the road and this is
where in the 80s the lava flow had just
wiped out the freeway and then you
to cross this lava field eventually
you'd come to a spot where the freeway a
brief stretch of it still existed and
then you would see a breadfruit tree
which if people aren't familiar is a
tree that grows a very large spiky fruit
kind of like a jackfruit and that's
where you turned right into the jungle
and walked for about a mile and ended up
at a shack and we lived in that Shack so
it was very difficult for us there's not
much traffic going out to a highway that
terminates in a lava field so it was not
particularly easy to get back into town
we were probably walking upwards of 15
miles a day on average you know about
five miles until you were deep enough in
the highway that there were
neighborhoods where people were driving
and so you could get a ride to and from
and then you know whatever walking we
were doing in the town and in the
surrounding area we are running off
water catchment that was infested with
mosquito larvae which was great we
didn't realize that until about two
weeks in we ate quite quite a number of
mosquito larvae it was infested with
cockroaches as well there's no natural
predators in Hawaii so all of the nasty
critters reproduce without limit and
about a week and a half into this me and
the girl the one girl got together which
sent the two guys off on their own
journey and one of the two guys my
friend and the guy that she had come
with we're the two guys he had the car
so we were suddenly stranded out in this
very remote area without a vehicle they
said they'd be back in a few days that
they were going for a hiking trip and
about a week in we realized that they
probably weren't coming back with no
word from them we very naively held on
to the hope that they would return for
quite a while
[Music]
so then yeah it was just me and her out
there and eventually we heard word of a
other community that was a little closer
to town and had other people there it's
also very dangerous as a white person to
be hitchhiking on those roads you hear
many very very gross stories of the
locals abusing obviously non-local
people there to very extreme degrees you
know one of the stories a few years
before we'd gotten there was a girl
camping at one of the national parks and
you know a group of method out locals
came raped her ran her over with I ran
her over with their truck broke her hip
raped her and then threw her off a cliff
and he would regularly he'll hear
stories of them you know just turning
the car a little because you're walking
on the edge of a highway and running
people over so you didn't want to go out
at night you wanted to have some type of
community that offered you some type of
security and the ability to you know
have extra resources while no one had
refrigerators so we moved to a place
called cinder land which called itself
an eco village and this was actually
quite a bit of fun it was basically a
hippie commune built out of a lava field
that a guy named Jesus of cinder land
with a Z G Z us jez us had bought and
restored and it was actually very
beautiful and the month-and-a-half that
we were there Jesus was actually on the
mainland going apparently through an
identity crisis so it was it was
relatively mild living there and many of
the more cultic aspects were muted and
it was largely just a bunch of hippies
that would have a big marijuana pizza
party on Saturdays to compete with the
Krishna's food party so he's two rival
groups each trying to indoctrinate or at
least interest people in their little
setup battling over over where to go on
Saturday night so yeah they'd make pot
pizza and then have a big drum circle
and kind of anyone was invited to come
hang out as usually groups of around 80
people show up eventually we decided to
come back to the mainland and ironically
I didn't actually realize how cult the
cinder land was until about a decade
later when they came up on reza aslan
cult project he was doing with with a
with a media organization I forget which
one but yes cinder land was one of the
places he visited and it turns out that
the giant tarps that we were all
sleeping under were intended to be sales
on an ark that would be sailed from the
Big Island to Machu Picchu to restart
humanity after global warming
sufficiently raised the sea levels that
sailing directly to Machu Picchu in a
boat was a possible thing to do and the
whole thing was built around Jesus with
the Z's whole idea of this end times
prophecy and his Noah like calling to
build an ark none of that was present
all the pot of water world Nick yeah I
think so I've never seen Waterworld but
I've heard many times that that's the
plot of water five movie night yeah so
that was that was cult experience number
two granted at the time and I have
plenty of very fun stories from that
time getting my first acupuncture from a
guy named Thunder who put needles all
the way through my feet in between the
two major bones of my feet as a
grounding mechanism but through the top
piercing out the bottom of my foot which
made me quite terrified of needles for a
good while after mermaid getting
attacked by two crackheads that were
throwing piss on her because she had
murdered her ex-boyfriend which
culminated in the entire group coming
out to chase the crackheads off fronted
by a guy named poo ayo who had
previously gotten a rat lungworm disease
which is a neuro degeneration born from
a parasite of slugs eating rat poop so
he had just such a classic character had
a moustache a ponytail he was about 5'4
or so you know in his 40s no t-shirt
always wore bored shooting board shorts
with combat boots and had two young
children but just the image of him with
this tick neurological tick he had from
the disease so he would you know kind of
twitch out every now he can't not
speaking pushing his kid and his
two-year-old in the stroller over this
lava field you know telling off these
crackheads is perhaps one of my fond
memories of this experience yeah it was
a very interesting time I avenged
came back to the mainland with the girl
we moved to a cabin she eventually got
developed some mixture of schizophrenia
and bipolar disorder
that resulted in a very strong suicidal
ideation and very extravagant level of
psychosis grande we were also quite
isolated in this location
this yeah that story did not end
particularly well although it gave me a
very clear idea of how deeply open we
are to having our sense of reality just
overcome by someone who was clearly
experiencing reality even if deluded in
a much more a much stronger way than I
was so I could see myself getting sucked
into her psychosis even as I was trying
to help her deal with it and bring her
back kind of down-to-earth
skipping over most of that outside of
how it pertains to this discussion we
eventually broke up or well she thought
I was I was a form of the Antichrist and
had been infected by a parasitic alien
living on my back which eventually led
to her leaving yeah I've got a weird
story
it seemed some of the head nods in the
baby no it's so odd because I thought
that about you for like the first like a
couple of times I met you I was like
actually you're pretty cool yeah it's
weird
so yeah she she moved out eventually her
psychosis got exponentially worse
without someone to kind of offer some
sense of grounding there her parents
eventually came out to the area and and
rescued her if you will she ended up
getting electroshock therapy to
rebalance her out likely heavy doses of
psychotropic stabilizers that
eventually led due to her seemingly
recovering so that's it has at least a
decent end at the end of the the story
they're following that situation I was
quite extremely depressed it had taken
in all of its forms a tremendous toll on
on my sense of self and self worth and
and all these kind of things so I spent
a good year and quite a very deep
depression following that whole scenario
and interestingly a right as I started
kind of coming out of it I picked up
some hobbies rock climbing and kind of
made friends and started connecting
myself back to to life I developed type
1 diabetes which is an autoimmune
disorder where your immune system kills
the insulin producing cells in your
pancreas
and this was 2012 I believe
[Music]
so that took a little bit of a blow I
recovered fairly quickly
oh no I'm skipping stuff cult 3 so this
is in-between breaking up with the girl
and getting type 1 diabetes
cult 3 was the same friend that I had
done do Hawaii with we went through
about a year where we weren't on great
terms due to the dramas of the situation
and eventually we you know became
friends again and everything was good he
had a person that gave a a guest
lecturer at his college you know many
years before all this stuff happened who
had heavily inspired him with kind of
this New Age message in a relatively
robust symbolic system of love and you
know I can I'll go more into this but he
had left a very deep impression on him
the guy had run a a permaculture farm so
again in the pursuit of trying to learn
permaculture he contacted this guy and
asked if we could come out to his farm
and learn some permaculture and at this
time my friend now had a wife and a
child a two-year-old and so all of us
went out to this guy's farm in Idaho on
the Panhandle
[Music]
and it quickly became obvious upon going
there that there was a lot more to the
story than just permaculture
and so we later found out that this guy
basically had run a pretty an
apocalyptic cult that failed when his
prediction for the end of the world came
out to not be accurate which I think was
in 2010 is when he had situated it and
it ends up that he had used McKenna's
time wave zero theory like straight up
took everything from it including the
use of the I Ching to try and you know
map where these changes would occur had
predicted the end of the world had a
pseudo scientific theory about how the
planet Nibiru or Planet X would fly by
the earth any any year now flippin it's
not it's a like electromagnetic axis but
it's actual physical axis about ninety
degrees which would cause the atmosphere
to light on fire creating an enormous
fireball around the planet that would
scorch the earth to six feet below
surface you know surface level while
causing enormous hurricanes and and
tsunamis and everything else he had
based all this off of the I Ching and
had plotted out the dates by looking at
past historical events much in the way
that McKenna did he just had a different
mechanism and view of what the event was
going to be so by the time we showed up
it was just him and his wife they'd lost
all of their cult following upon the
failure of this prediction but he was no
less trying nonetheless trying to
convince us of his his model and and
again it was very interesting because
you had this philosophy promoting love
and community and care all built on top
of the impending end of the the world
and this is very common in cultic
structures it's very common in non
cultic structures or I'll get more
refined with this but I'm using cultic
structures here in a way that most
people would agree that's a cult and
this thing over here isn't
but apocalyptic mythos is is
tremendously common in all worldviews
whether they are religious or not and I
do have a theory for why that is it's
not very complicated writes the
externalization of our own death
projected upon the world so that we can
interface with it and come to terms with
it and likewise forming some idea of
hope from within these modes of deep
transformation
um anyways I was battling this guy
constantly you know I had a much
stronger grasp of at least some amount
of science science currently to be able
to push back against him quite strongly
and I should point out you know
interfacing with these three cults again
coming deeply from my kind of
individualist mythos I viewed myself as
like a a pressure tester you know I
could see clearly and so I could fight
and argue these these scenarios better
than most could and and that kind of
grew as I interacted with one after
another after another and I had started
to learn particularly in these kind of
new agey groups where people have a
tendency to heavily idealize the
positive side of the spectrum and to try
and disown their negative emotions or
shadow to ruin a cult leader in these
scenarios is very easy all you have to
do is get them to reveal their their
shadow in some extravagant way and it
usually takes very little actual pushing
to get them to do so
and then you can just point out the
hypocrisy between their message and
their behavior so yeah new New Age cults
are very easy to take down if you are
interested in doing so
we got kicked out from there about a
month and a half after trying to make it
work and my constant arguing some of the
arguments get getting pretty pretty
heated and and yeah we left and I lived
I moved to Santa Cruz which is where I
still AM after the Idaho later in that
year after getting diabetes got diabetes
moved here to Santa Cruz about three
months after I was diagnosed and had
been here since
went through you know I started playing
around quite heavily there's a lot of
really interesting groups I be I hung
out with when I first moved here the
whole music in just there
groups in the area some of them are new
AG groups and all kinds of stuff I had a
lot of fun that was a method of social
relating that I had not well-developed
before then I eventually got a job at a
major jewelry producer within the
festival community called third eye
pinecones who have a bit of a cult
following with in the festival community
and I ended up working with them for
about three years until I finally went
to a festival and my illusions had
dropped about what was happening within
these festival and New Age communities
and just how rampant they were with
absolute and how artificial the
supposed growth and transformation was
and this actually created in me a pretty
strongly manic state as as my worldview
that I had been using for quite a number
of years kind of in the Peter Sounion
sense the Deadwood all burnt very
rapidly and all at once
and I go into more detail I've done five
interviews with Paul van der clay on his
channel where I run through a lot of
this in a lot more detail and I've
shared this specific part earlier in one
of our discussions sharing a religious
experience but basically you know I was
in this relatively manic phase I had the
distinct sensation of being able to see
into people or through people
not quite psychic but something almost
more like I could actually I was not
blinding myself intentionally to any of
the signals people were putting out and
they were putting out so many signals
that it was really easy to see the
artifice of their identity
also the sim symbolic impact of the
world in the modern world became very
transparent there was almost this
constant revelation of a death wish of a
hope for her apocalypse seemingly
screaming from everything from the way
we structured our cities to the
architecture to the mode people behaved
when interacting with these systems all
of which I almost described as a type of
flow extreme flow state that I could not
leave I could not get out of it I could
not come back to norm and ironically
this was in many ways what I had been
dreaming was my ideal state while
partaking in these kind of New Age
communities you know Oh finally I could
see and upon finally seeing all I could
wish for was that I wish I could stop
seeing so much like please I don't want
to see what I'm you know the nature of
the situation let me be back in the kind
of dream of what this is
eventually I realized that if I laid
myself out on the floor in a classically
prayer or submission like position that
I found some relief and again I I would
describe this in very physical terms of
like feeling energy moving through the
body or like which areas of my nervous
system we're being lit up
in that position it felt like the energy
could actually flow all the way through
the spine and could leave the body
instead of kind of regurgitating inside
of the body leading to this
schizophrenic like state where my
delusions were being filled with so much
of this kind of psychic energy that they
started to manifest themselves in my
phenomenology I spent a number of days
spending a lot of time in that position
again just because it was the only thing
I could find relief in and eventually
this led to a very powerful religious
experience of some type of being
interfacing with me touching me on the
forehead which led to this enormous
sensation of like clearing out where
these kind of like blockages in the
energy and the body were suddenly opened
and the energy could just fall through
without me like getting into these manic
states as a side effect and then it told
me to get up get off my knees like quit
you know quit whatever you're doing
right there that's not and I was deeply
relieved from this state and most
bizarrely my type 1 diabetes went away
temporarily and as measured you know I
was doing finger prick tests it wasn't
like magic or something or I just
thought it was gone it was physically
not responding I stopped taking insulin
for about a month after about a month
that destabilized and I had noticed this
destabilization phenomenologically as
well as I was trying to interface with
the world and go to do my job and all
these things in these rather extravagant
states of mind
another two weeks I think it was a total
of a month and a half I was off insulin
and then yeah a month afterwards it had
started to destabilize two weeks later I
took insulin again because my blood
Sugar's were totally off the map once
again and in that state I had basically
created an ultimatum at my job where
either I could play a role in the upper
management of the company or I needed to
leave and during that time actually
right after coming back from the
festival I got a random friend two-week
request on Facebook from the person that
ended up being the cult leader of cult
number four
so going through this state you know I
was interacting with him but mostly in a
sense of battling I was trying to take
him down in the way that I dealt with
previous cult leaders and you know it
was fun and all this stuff and I found
that even at the highest state I had
experienced I could not take this person
down so the perfect confluence of events
all lined up and I basically upon it's a
bizarre story in itself how almost
successful I was in taking over a
company that I just decided I should run
for no reason at all like they were
really bizarrely considering actually
letting me run this company eventually I
kind of blew my you know I lost
my patience to deal with the situation
and they were able to see that break and
go oh okay we need to you know push this
person out properly so so I left that
company and in this kind of bizarre
state of coming down from this very
ecstatic state and finding myself in a
very you know separated from a lot of
the systems that I was partaking in to
contextualize my life leading up to that
moment holy I've almost gone for an
hour good lord I need to speed it up
that's intense Wow
I basically viewed it as as as this sign
that I had I clearly had something to
learn from this person
I did not naively go that there's some
magical person or anything like that but
rather viewed it in this kind of deeply
uh you know pragmatic sense of like okay
they've learned something I haven't and
whatever they learned is deeply related
to emotional processing that I'm very
unskilled at and emotional stability
so I ended up eventually after a number
of months joining that cult
and this is where the star story is a
lot harder for me to tell because
there's so many aspects and because all
of it was taking place online there's
not a clear lived in narrative that I
can relate and in for the Gov brevity
and I probably should this is the area I
should least have applied brevity but
basically this cult started as a
transformational type set up and as the
kind of inability of it to deliver on
what it had said it could deliver on
became more apparent it started sliding
into more authoritarian takes until
right so it's like okay we're not
getting to the ends so it must mean our
means it's not as important as we
thought and there's a slide from the
means being primary to the ends being
primary and sacrificing the means in the
the process and eventually it went from
its cult formation as a pseudo temple
pseudo religious structure to a pseudo
militaristic structure and started
calling itself using military
terminology there was about to two or
three weeks maybe a month after it made
that change that I went ok this is
something clearly has gone wrong I could
pull away from it enough to see the
trend and I left the people that did not
leave you know it took a while but after
about this was also its transition from
URL to IRL so moving from online only to
like there there bring in people all
into the same area under the same roof
and are getting a lot more hands-on with
its techniques and so I never ended up
meeting the the leaders in person
although I had met a couple of the other
members
and that whole thing I could really
spend a lot of time talking about in the
details of how incredibly powerful its
manipulations were and how counter to
many of the concepts people have of I of
cults is but I'm hoping it will kind of
come through in the later sections and
I've already spent way too much time
here so you can also go look at the Paul
van der clay videos where I talk a
little bit more about this if you're if
you're interested I will try and end it
there for now and see if anyone has any
questions
does anyone else have a question
I do but I
missed a lot of what you said make so
just from the last guess half an hour so
I have so many questions the first thing
I want to say is I feel like I should
have paid for that even just like the
last bit that I heard would I pay for it
it was yea credible to listen to your
unusually insightful about what would
have been what seemed to be the most
like discombobulating experiences right
I got like a lot of people just have no
insight like it's a very strange time in
my life and but you like it was this it
was structured this way I was drawn
because I was and and so yeah anyway I
just yeah I would have paid the question
is you think that as a personality you
know there's something called the
authoritarian personality into kind of
old kind of somewhat hackneyed collage
achill construct and a lot of people
take it to me like some you know like
Hitler or authoritarian personality
trait it's more the people who had drawn
people who seem to exude some kind of
authority interestingly and I don't know
if this is true in every case but it
seems to be that you were drawn by a
kind of a challenge yes I'm gonna be
bunk this because I'm and then somehow
you're like turned around
yeah so why is it that you think you're
drawn to something in that sense not as
a true believer from day one right but
as you go into challenged things and
then somehow you like wait what just
happened there I'm yeah so is that you
make of that facet of your personality
so it is interesting too because I never
dropped the challenge in Coke for I like
literally it made use of people's doubt
as part of its structure it was
constantly infighting so I never
actually let go of the idea that I'm
like either here to believe in this and
follow it or I'm here to destroy it
because it's
and so again like I went into it with
like a really deeply pragmatic kind of
framework and a lot of it was it's
almost like a cheesy old kung fu movie
you know like yeah I brought my best
kung fu against them you know this
master
he easily defeated me even at my peak so
then I you know go okay well I'll learn
your kung-fu then it's you know beat me
master I will join the right Oh was it
it's because you're scientifically
inclined in some sense right so there's
it wasn't likely we're trying to argue
no a particular kind of crystal against
a particular kind of you know like rune
sign or trying to falsify and find
contradictions and collapse the world
view great Oh what was it rational
arguments this guy had or you you answer
yeah we just hit 25 people maybe let's
turn off our cameras cause otherwise
people are gonna get blocked sorry going
it was not rationally based and it made
very obvious use of not rationality but
a very different style of argumentation
it was very deeply involved in in
trolling and basically the efficacy of
trolling and how deep of an effect it
can have on someone's perception of
themselves in their worldview
and in many ways it could attack the
overuse of rationality itself granted it
did so in a very particular way so
there's aspects here of kind of classic
you know Lifton's thought stopping
techniques and yet the thought stopping
techniques were not thought stopping in
and of themselves rather they very
deeply focused one on their
phenomenological experience and asked
the person if you're going to make the
argument know where you're making it
from and what tools you're using and why
you're using them so there was a lot of
like shadow integration type stuff in
cult 4 and that was part of what made me
go you know oh I clearly have something
to learn here as belonging and all these
kind of new agey circles for so long I
had kind of subconsciously picked up the
lack of integration of the shadow and
then I I had the weakness in my ability
to wield the shadow very blatantly
called to my attention just by
interacting with this person these
people
I don't know if that answered your
question or not but no no it does
basically the rational way of pulling
you to question rational underpinnings
we write this on your rationality by
removing their foundation effectively
yes kind of jujitsu move nothing going
to Jitsu but yeah yeah thanks dogs right
thank you and a lot of it was like why
am i it was a legitimate question of
like why am i placing so much faith in
my intellect when I am also overtly
aware of its ability to itself
and what I saw and then was a type of
like deep ontological security that I
was lacking and was trying to make up
for by overintellectualizing everything
that's how I interpreted it I've
interpreted it at the time at least I
can I ask a gratuitous bonus question
please say I'm just saying alright yeah
no just let's give you a quick just
because he has a lot more to go through
and there's a few other questions I
think for this section
yeah then I'll pause but thanks so much
Michael it was awesome great they kill
me I think you had a question on this
section
yeah can you hear me okay yep
yeah I actually just I was getting some
lag and I actually missed a detail that
I was really curious to know I heard you
say that you got a job at a fashionable
jewelry company and then I lost you and
then I heard that you were in that crazy
manic state and I missed how you got
there he could maybe just recap that
yeah Jana I'm gonna temporarily mute
there we go um yeah so I was you know we
were working out of a garage at a house
you know pumping out these these
pendants and us the actual craftsmen
behind it had very lint little
interfacing with the festival circuit
side of it and so I I was kind of
operating under this bizarre mythology
of what I thought I was doing and what I
thought was going on in the festival
circuits particularly the more
spiritually oriented ones which were the
ones that we were largely dealing with
and it was upon being invited after
about two and a half almost three years
of working for the company to go see the
festival end of it that my kind of
mythos with which I was using to
contextualize my my you know life came
crumbling down quite rapidly and that
seemed to spark the the burning of
Deadwood moment or the burning very hot
as I've called it before
that's quite interesting thank you
anybody else
just on this section was general
questions at the end
Oh Thank You Jada vids Curtin is indeed
the word I could not think of for the
Harry Krishna's singing
where
ramping up a victim culture and their
expression of white fragility I'll save
your your question there Jada vids for
the end is it's a little off topic for
this section
and DMT how are cults economically
viable there's endless ways in which
they can form economically viable
strategies coal for was deeply not
economically viable but the the
Krishna's had definitely figured that
whole thing out yeah there's there's a
quite a many number of ways one might go
about doing so okay
so though to try and get through this
we're already halfway through which is
not a good sign for being able to make
it through a lot of the material that I
had planned it may be that we could
split this up if it's seen we can only
do a part two right so yeah that that
actually might be useful almost viewing
this whole section as problem
formulation and then maybe doing a
briefer part two where we go over some
of the potential answers to those
problems yeah I think people are finding
this story pretty fascinating so so
especially on this the latest coat where
you said it's probably useful to go into
more detail that was right that might be
great right yeah yeah I could yeah okay
that makes sense we could do that and
then and then dive into some of the
framing stuff so yeah cope for was
really interesting in that by any normal
definition of not normal by almost any
normal oh my gosh I did it again any
scholarly definition of cult that is
usually touted by supposed cult experts
it was technically not a cult however it
called itself a cult and very obviously
had many features that would make one
say this is a cult even if in the
details
avoided the scholarly definition of what
a cult was yes cat
okay so Oh
with the Catholics she's very
opinionated very so for one the leaders
of the cult were not taken as some type
of like super Authority combating them
questioning them was entirely welcome
and it very much again took on that kind
of like kungfu vibe and eventually after
losing to the same person so many times
you just kind of accept that you're
gonna lose the next time as well but
invited you know this cut this frame of
not agreeing for the sake of agreeing or
creating this intense mythos around the
leaders granted that did become more
present later in the cults development
we might be able to tie some of this in
well keep giving a description and we
can try and play with it a little within
the description uh if you look into
Lifton's eight tenants of thought reform
for people that aren't familiar with
liftin he kind of wrote the book not
kind of he literally wrote the book on
brainwashing that came out of him
analyzing the Maoist Chinese
indoctrination methods one you know the
first one in his list is Malou control
or controlling the information that one
has access to one may be very familiar
with that in the idea of these thought
bubbles that form from having a eyes
guide what we think we will or what we
will click on and so there's a very deep
level of Malou control just operating in
our lives now as as as a matter of
course from organizing and making use of
the Internet
there was none of that in this cult it
directly interfaced with culture with
pop culture there was no containment on
you-know-what you could interact with or
anything like that or what the trusted
sources of information were in some
sense all sources of information
including those in the cults were to be
considered suspect granted it did have a
way of organizing what ended up being
really powerful techniques for
communicating a worldview just by
juxtaposing content siphoned off of the
internet from any number of sources so
by basically in the same way that people
would make a tumblr board where you
could hone in on a sense of their
aesthetic just by them collecting media
in a particular way they made
extravagant use of that to try and
communicate ideas much more so than
actually communicating the ideas and I
might add that many cults nowadays are
moving I think Oh in some sense away
from the idea of millou control and into
the idea of millou flooding which is to
say that if you flood the information
sources that a person has access to they
will perform the millou control of their
own accord by projecting their worldview
onto the information just so that they
can navigate the world and this is a
really subtle change that I think has
really profound effects in in how people
go about sense making and in our in our
current time
let's see
we can
oops
I think what I'm gonna try and do here
is pull in liftin overtly
and kind of go through his list of
thought reform and mind control bits and
then kind of relate them to coke for and
try and show how they're both similar
and different and how how new forms of
cultic structures might might be
effective in an age where it's a lot
harder to recognize them as such
so using that as a primer the the next
one that that lifts and brings up as
mystical manipulation and this is the
overt manipulation of experiences to
make them appear spontaneous when they
are in fact controlled and intended so
this is like magic right the the
magician has a very specific way of
focusing your attention on certain
things so that you can't see the trick
and then surprising you with the trick
at the end
and I would say that this is ever less
present well it's tricky because it's
still extraordinarily present in pseudo
religious or religious or or
transformative communities even
political but it's it's you know this is
a lot of like the conspiracy theory you
can attach patterns to things and then
suddenly make them appear mystical
regardless of whether was someone was
intending to give you the impression
that it was mystical or not and I would
say another big side effect of this is
the huge uptick in psychedelics which
opens up the pattern finding systems in
the brain so wide that you basically
don't even need to trick the person you
just have to get them to trick
themselves or even you know very
slightly give the indication that they
should be on psychotropic substances as
some form of enlightenment or something
along those lines that's not to say that
they cannot have a positive effect but
it is to say that they can very very
easily be manipulated there was yeah in
quote for there was a lot less of that
but there was a very in the overt sense
but there was very much the
conspiratorial very wide net cast for
pattern recognition granted it was also
part of the cult to not be on any
substances
so yeah you get kind of a interesting
juxtaposition their demand for purity in
many ways cult for was anti purity and
purity very deeply at the same time so
one of the things they asked was that
everyone wear white granted I never
ended up actually doing this but some of
the some of the well one of the members
did and the leaders did accept that the
wearing of white was not actually meant
to represent your purity so much as to
be honest such that you could not hide
the dirt and the stains and all these
you know bits you collect walking around
in the world on white clothing they
reveal everything and so that was
actually the ideal behind the white
clothing rather than trying to create an
image of purity it was trying to be
honest with the lack of purity and at
the same time it it was meant to operate
then as well if you can stay clean in
white clothing it means that you're
paying very deep attention to how you
are interacting with the world because
it requires a tremendous amount of you
know mental labor to keep from dirtying
your white clothes it did have a demand
for purity in the sense of honesty
however that deep demand for honesty
carried with it a deep LeeAnn type Urist
connotation and it was very deeply
focused on integration of the shadow and
not trying to pretend you are something
you are not so there's a lot of bizarre
inversions happening there where you can
still end up with something like a
demand for purity that is not on its
surface or even in practice the kind of
familiar forms of purity testing that we
normally come across right there was no
deeply moral purity testing or anything
like that although it did have very
strict regulations on how one would
should
their life and one of the main tenants
was to be extraordinarily pure in your
physical life so as to open up more
flexibility in your emotional life and
you know one of their tenants was that
they believed that basically we had this
inverted that that people were trying
far too hard to create an image of
emotional purity and sacrificing
physical purity on its altar so right
you see the the false
you know Instagram star or youtube star
and they always make sure the room
behind them is impeccable and organized
and they've got all their makeup on and
the lighting is just right meanwhile you
know the camera falls down one day and
you see behind you know their veil and
it's just this shithole you know rat
nest of a place they're living in or you
know like however that may be occurring
so they they were trying to take that
image focus and flip it on its head and
I think there is actually you know there
is as much as I would like to say
everything about the cult was a
and they were evil there were many
aspects where it's like well that's
actually not entirely off-base that we
probably should be paying more attention
to the purity of our environments
ironically this was well before Jordan
Pederson hit the market and his main
message of course main mean being the
clean your room mean and how that offers
one a certain level of emotional
stability
confession is the next on Lifton's list
and this is normally a way to to gain
power over a person by blackmailing I
can also be a way to guilt trip them
into feeling like they need whatever it
is you're selling in a type of you know
racketeering manner
I would I would add to this that the
idea of confession while still very
prevalent obviously like this is the
whole hyper leftist thing of course
along with the purity moral purity
testing but
I would also say that we in many ways
have replaced the idea of confession
with the idea of authenticity which is
to say one should unapologetically be a
confessional list which is arguably what
the original purpose of confession was
but so yeah you know one more bit to pay
attention to and how these ideas kind of
have morphed since the time of Lifton's
writing and you got two ends there the
guilt complex of confession and then the
honest positive aspect of confession
which I think there is much value to but
it is also dangerous sacred science the
group's doctrine or ideology is
considered to be the ultimate truth
beyond all questioning or dispute again
the cult specifically it did not have
this orientation towards ideology in the
normal sense it very much had its quite
rigid practices and ways of doing so and
yet rationalize them on a deeply
pragmatic basis rather than an
ideological basis and again I think that
is a transition that really needs to be
paid attention to as people move forward
in these types of things and I think a
lot of this comes from the the switch in
having a normative objective truth as
the standard the cultural standard to
having this much more subjective concept
of truth that is largely defined on
one's ability to exhibit narcissistic
power right how to overwhelm someone's
subjectivity with your own subjectivity
and how that changes the nature of what
we might consider a sacred science
however you of course you then have
projects like Verve a keys where there's
kind of a mixture of having a sacred
science and and this kind of pragmatic
basis and this at
to deal with it by removing metaphysics
and I have I have support and critique
in all of that motion there's one thing
to be aware of
loading the language and thought
terminating cliches this is perhaps one
of the aspects that people are more
familiar with there's been quite a bit
of discussion in Verve a Keyes group
about the idea of reinventing terms as
it is a form of loading the language and
right thought terminating cliches are
almost platitudes or mean structures
that allow one to communicate in
ideology without having to explain the
ideology in a way that makes the person
on the receiving end believe that it's
self-evident there's lots of ways to do
that and the both of these are so deeply
written into what it means to use
language at all that I think we have to
be really careful about drawing lines in
this territory cult for very much had
heavy manipulation of language and one
could consider this part of its anti
purity or anti charismatic tone in that
it very heavily misspelled things to the
point of creating the a a repulsion
response within people that used
language normally part of that was
rationalized on it actually makes it
safer for those that are encountering
your message because it makes you really
easy to dismiss right they can go oh
this guy's clearly a idiot and
they don't have to read past the
external symbols to what you're actually
communicating likewise it has a filter
bubble in that it selects for people
that are willing to look past the normal
credibility judgments that we are
running filters on to decide what is
good information from bad information
and selects for people that are willing
to look beyond the immediate expression
of words
[Music]
likewise there was very many made-up
terms and specialized language
specialized use of language within coal
for a lot of it quite useful a lot of it
you know manipulative and it kind of
went all over the place in that regard
doctrine over person members personal
experiences are subordinated to the
sacred science than any contrary
experiences must be denied or
reinterpreted to fit the ideology of the
group
I would say again this is kind of
related to sacred science in that it
seems like we are switching doctrine
over person to person over person again
because we are losing our grip on there
being such a thing as objective truth
and a side effect of this is that we've
entered into this battling of
ontological States or or perhaps more
accurately narcissistic States so yeah
there's a lot of ways you could go into
that cult for flirted on the edge of
this you know it very deeply cared and
ended many processes to to look at and
record and deeply pay attention to
people's subjective experience
however it also reinterpreted those
experiences within a frame it's
sense-making framework and I think that
is fundamental to any type of therapy so
I think if one again draws the line too
harshly here you're gonna throw out most
systems any type of transformational
system in the process so we might want
to reframe that question later and then
the final one with liftin is dispensing
of existence the group has the
prerogative to decide who has the right
to exist and who does not this is
usually not literal but means that those
in the outside world are not saved
unenlightened unconscious and they must
be converted to the group's ideology
again in cult for this was partially
true and partially not true it
definitely had a bifurcation in the
in-group and the out-group it did not
then suppose that the people had to be
literally in the cult to be part of the
in-group and likewise being in the cult
did not save you from being in the out
group so yeah there's a lot of fuzziness
here particularly when interacting with
liftin and thinking that it's giving us
a really useful tool for for interacting
with systems as
they now operate there is a lot of value
here there's also a lot that's a little
questionable and there's a lot that has
transformed so radically that paying to
strongly attend too much attention to
lifting can actually blind you to the
way other ways in which one might be
manipulated or you know have their
thoughts contextualized by an external
system oh that was a lot of talking do
we have any questions on this whole pit
so how do you think these cult leaders
manipulate people into these worldviews
like what do you think the strategy is
there how do you think they're effective
oh man I think it fun like if in my own
sense making people have a deep
solipsistic vulnerability right this is
its can't right it starts a can't this
is kind of like the whole thrust of
post-modernism but it's there in each
it's it's really become part of our
context is it's kind of realizing how
vulnerable we are as in this very cell
up cystic manner right one can always
cast doubt on one's self or you know
perceptions not only of themselves but
of the world around them and people have
been making use of that vulnerability
now for a very long time right this the
century of the self documentary goes
into how this was played with with in
much more secular contexts with the
development of propaganda and
advertising and public relations from
Freud's nephew so putting to use
psychoanalysis to manipulate very large
groups of people into hard like behavior
so you know at some level the question
is like how does at why does advertising
work and it's tamiya just seems to be
like it's it's part and parcel of human
sense making to begin with and we can we
can definitely dive more into that sense
making and its vulnerabilities and how
they're misused against us and likewise
you know some amount of it is is is
deeply owning how insanely vulnerable we
are in this regard
right and in many ways I I have in at
times kind of blamed the ideology of
individualism for atrophying people's
ability to recognize this because we
rationalize all of our behavior as
coming from us when the very very vast
majority of it is coming from our
affiliations with the people in our
lives with the groups we interact with
and with it with the culture that we
participate in
- that answer the question that was very
interesting thank you Mark get it yet a
question
yeah Nick who one of the things I hear
talked about a lot where this is coming
from necessarily I think it's more
related to the game a game D thing is
the concept of this mean Plex
being the force that manipulates people
and so you know from bad I imagine for
various reasons I'm sure surprised no
one that that the mean Plex must play or
some version of a mean Plex must play a
role in some of these cults and so I
don't want to get ahead of your stories
or the pieces that you're laying out
here so I'll just couch this in the
context of you know so far four cults
one through four
have you seen elements that you would
describe as a mean Plex that interact in
a way that is significant to encouraging
people to adhere in to the cults right
it's a great question absolutely I would
say more fundamentally than
well it's it gets a little tricky right
because I will later go on to try and
play with the idea of Colt and in many
ways it seems like a cult is where these
mean plexes interface with sociology
right so it's it's not just in the
worldview as a subjective filtering
neither is it wholly located in the
outside groups and the social structures
but it seems to be this this bizarre or
you know
well perhaps natural marriage of how our
worldviews form themselves into
sociological structures as we go about
interacting with the world through our
our meme plexus if you will
cult four was most obviously overtly
aware of the use of memes and the
creation of meme plexus as as kind of
distortion fields by which one uses
right but the meme to create and it was
very overtly involved with creating a
very robust memeplex now these meme
plexes were of course obviously present
in all the other cults as well yet there
was some sense of naivety or or a lack
of awareness about that aspect in that
they they still believed in a kind of
modernist notion that they had some
access to a to a a legitimate truth that
justified the mean Plex and took it out
of the meta understanding of what a a
belief system is doing or a worldview is
doing
man I feel like I'm rambling so much I
hope this is coherent guys I had a quick
follow-up because I always I'm just
trying to wonder if you know if you
think that that my formulation that the
memeplex is the mediating force for a
type of participatory manipulation would
be a correct formulation for the cult
you've experienced yes it would and I
would also add that that type of
manipulation is entirely unavoidable and
so I I would focus the question around
not how do we how do we you know get out
of meme plexes but how do we make how do
we how do we judge which ones are
healthy and have constructive effects
from those you know proper mediation
from those that are are you know
creating negative or disastrous effects
yeah I think I think yeah that's where I
was yesterday so I'm just gonna stick my
tongue out metaphorically i'm irrational
and and maybe fact here yeah thank you
did you have any negative repercussions
for leaving any of these four coats um
no not by the cults themselves but yes
on the other end just because at least
particularly in cult for which i
actually looked at the dates recently i
was interacting with cult for for about
a year and a half and i was in the cult
for a little over a year but right just
as a side effect of interacting with it
you you accrue you know
your your community your sense of
meaning in life like all these things
get sucked up into belonging in the cult
so even if the cult had no repercussions
whatsoever for saying no and matter of
fact the cult constantly was asking for
consent
did you could be is the person after
living the last one yes yeah definitely
you experienced it after every cult
uh mostly after for the cult for I I had
some amounts of it in the other ones but
they were mostly easy enough to dismiss
and I was I was confident enough in my
deconstruction of their systems that it
didn't have as strong of a negative
effect also I did not build nearly as
deep of relationships within those those
other three
you talked about being delusional at
some point did the cult did the first
two cults I think it was between the
second and third maybe did they get you
to that today it induced that state
somehow in you
no but staying in a one-room cabin with
a schizophrenic bipolar person
definitely did Jo move you're not
talking please mute your mics guys
did I I don't know if I answered your
question sufficiently I actually forget
when I brought up delusion
yeah no you were you were sick yeah no
you I thought you said it was right
before you had were diagnosed with
diabetes and I think yeah so that that
must have been when I was talking about
being with the the girl that I met in
Hawaii unrelated to this did you ever
experience like losing touch with
reality when he was in the cult
it really depends on how you like
psychotic kind of break no no not in
obvious although there was a background
effect that participating in the cult
seemed to create a pseudo bipolar state
in people of this kind of
manic-depressive swinging but it was it
was well within normal limits to not you
know require medication or anything like
that it was just very clear that there
were these periods where you know if
there would be a burst of energy that
felt like a form of insight and
following it would kind of lead to
another following state of a depressive
cycle and that seemed to be present in
everyone in the cult I might also add
that Pavlov had a really interesting
experiment with two different types of
kind of dispositions of dog one kind of
excitable and happy the other kind of
calm and they did this project where
they would reward the dog for being able
to pick out the circle compared to the
ellipse and then they slowly started
distorting the circle to be more of an
ellipse or an ellipses and they would
make the ellipses more like a circle
until the dog couldn't tell which one
was which
and so the the punishment and the reward
started appearing random to the dog and
in each of the the different kind of
temper temperaments of the dogs the ones
that were previously kind of excitable
became aggressive and and would start
snapping and stuff like that whereas as
the more mild-mannered happy dog became
depressed upon interfacing with this
system and that was certainly happening
within cult for this kind of constant
motion where you couldn't tell what
behavior you were performing was going
to be rewarded or punished
and how that seemed to feed into this
pseudo bipolar like state that it seemed
to induce in people so you said you know
that was mainly online so you weren't
living there and what in what manner did
the this enforcement take place
uh it would be through through social
media so just like you know calling you
out on your you know kind of
public humiliation to some degree of
rewards were just quite simple you know
use the the like button or whatever yeah
I mean it's it's all reward systems that
are all blatantly present on the
platform regardless of whether you're in
a cult or not already right you say the
wrong thing in your tweet and you get
lambasted by a mob of people that
disagree with you it was very similar to
that it just had its own particular
filter that wasn't you know whatever
other cultic filter people are using on
these platforms that probably leads into
Jay Jay's question did you want to do
that now
uh yeah let me here already know so
considering the apparent ramping up of
victim culture and it pseudo academic
underpinnings by critical AKA cynical
theories does critical race Theory
namely the Angelo's white for gentle
agility map on to your cult detection
criteria pattern absolutely yeah quite
overtly a lot of this was used within
cult for as well it had a pretty leftist
Bend granted it did something very
different with it then then the popular
meme of the far left right now but I
might also add that Mike detection
criteria as I will probably get into
next time is much much broader than than
the way that the word is is commonly
used however I would I would entirely
say that there are many aspects of
classic formation going on in in that
whole realm
also you see it on the right you see it
like you see it everywhere it's once he
kind of get a really clear idea of how
it works it's hard not to see it
everywhere and that might be an over
detection problem it could also be
pointing towards just some fundamental
quality of of the nature of our
sociological structures which is where
my mind has gone with it seems to be in
a question of degree like a lot of the
things that you talked about you know we
see even elements here and elements you
know everywhere so yeah these criteria
would it be more on the extreme that we
have to be worried about rather than
yeah the the extreme for sure although I
think there's also a danger in over
characterizing it as existing on the
extreme in which we allow much subtler
but still extraordinarily effective
forms of manipulation to creep in what
I've tried to do as I'll again get into
probably next time is is try and ask ok
some of these things are are fundamental
or are necessary it seems a lot more
useful to me to ask how can this tool be
used destructively or against someone or
weaponized and how can they be used
positively or constructively healthfully
to promote health within a sociological
system well but these people these
people didn't consider themselves to be
causing harm right or do you think they
did oh yeah no they had no oh
good intentions but they also had no no
scruples about saying yeah I'm attacking
your ego right or like yeah this is
probably gonna hurt or yeah you're
 up right now so again there was
no purity or goodness as a moral
standard within it very few people who
have bad intentions it's just often that
they have such good intentions that
justifies terrible things exactly yeah I
think there's a problem also NIC I'd be
instead in your sorry I think Manny was
trying to get in well I was I was
wondering about this this ability to see
through people when you referenced a
similar thing rather seeing true Colts
right so like did it disappear or did
you integrate it in some way yeah so
largely it felt like just the vision got
cloudy and I started re-entering a kind
of deeply solipsistic take where it felt
like I could see things I could make
sense of things but there was this
underlying phenomenological quality that
what I was actually seeing was my own
projection upon the world whereas this
seeing very clearly state felt like I
was actually interacting with the world
I was I was picking up signals from it
not from regurgitated signals that I was
projecting on to it and then consuming
again I had spent a lot of time trying
to develop that ability and that's why
upon realizing what I considered the the
fruition right kind of the the the
the full form of that type of seeing I
found myself in a very deep type of Hell
which is not what I was expecting having
pursued such a type of vision in the
many years leading up to that experience
Nik could you also see a type of heaven
yes and I would say that when that
vision was functioning properly which is
to say when the I had that experience of
the the thing touching and then this
clearing of the of the state where I
could ground the energy back into the
the earth instead of regurgitating it
out the top of my head I definitely
still had the sense of seeing very
clearly but it flowed in this very deep
phenomenological sense of a gothic love
that was not coming from me but which
was seemingly fully informing my action
and my my
sense of the world and there was a very
deep you know particularly after that of
after that event this very deep sense of
of not even a heaven as separate from
what is currently happening but rather
the heaven that was obviously and always
present even in the very you know messed
up world I found myself in
go ahead actually
okay
I would pay money I would pay money
let's justwell say that again very much
appreciate extremely mixed no and say I
will pay money it's like I would but
really yeah oh I meant I appreciate the
compliment not the money when you were
going like ah you know I I'm sorry I'm
wasting time I was like just take time
like more just you know as much detail
you can describe it in um your comments
on this
it's a really interesting notion who
have developed or even to believe you've
developed this ability to see through
people
have a distillation of something which
is fundamental you might say it's
fundamental to cults but really it's
just fundamentally human it's just a
cults ramped it up more it's not they
aren't doing something alien I think
that's a mistake people make when I they
do this it's just so human to us that's
why it works right so eing it you you
you get this ability to see through
people it's choking because it's self
referential you realize you're doing it
too right actually in this and so my
question is do you think that that's why
you found it no like a lens by which you
could really navigate people's
motivations or at least see the game
that they were playing or the game we
humans play the games that entities play
conscious entities play right and by
reference yourself it's kind of choking
the heaven that you see there is that
this like yeah a gapek kind of notion
that we're all doing this like I can't
blame you anymore than I can blame me is
that in those three worlds so I'm
talking about the lensing and the
transparency the notion which becomes
choking and then finally that like wait
a minute it could be a heaven here
because I realize you're not the evil
guy pulling the string you're you're
doing what I'm doing we're in this is my
analysis off there is that roughly oh
you feel it or interpreted so there's
some interesting bits here usually I I
try I did not do as well a job this time
but I try and hedge my description of
those experiences by saying I'm
describing the phenomenological state I
was in
rather than granted there is overt signs
and responses from the people around me
that lend me to the belief that there
was something there there was a sense in
which I was seeing more deeply in those
moments than is the standard so yeah it
gets a little confusing but to be on the
safe side I try and locate it as a in
phenomenology um felt felt like you
could make sense right
um so there's two bits there because I'm
one I was responding to the state I had
before being in the cult of this
religious experience in the state I
found myself in after it and that's
where I've had this a gothic love in
this kind of clarity however within the
cult there was also this sense of a type
of clarity but the phenomenology felt
really off right there was no a gothic
love it was more of oh my ego is a
construct everyone else's egos are
constructs I can play a game inside of
these constructs and I can push on them
I can see through the game they're
playing because I see through the game
I'm playing by interacting with them but
there was a kind of harsh cynicism to
the whole thing that was rationalized on
a vision of heaven that was not
available within my phenomenology at all
while doing the interactions you were
never really a true believer were more
like you had a like a dissociative frame
where you were sort of an anthropologist
Owens right he's famous right Bernstein
yeah no I'd still pay I pay a book or
something
um so much there you said Paul van der
clay did I get that right yeah yeah he's
got a YouTube channel I think he has a
playlist I can try and find it and post
it but uh I've done five interviews with
him they're pretty wide-ranging and I go
over a lot of what I talked about here
in those I'd be really grateful of it
just as a kind of reference I think that
you won't be doing this till the end of
time if you have a link to those Ida
Pete I yeah you could post yeah I'll
throw it in a vent text when I get a
moment we've only got about ten minutes
left so uh yeah thanks
did we have a further question it looks
like there's a few in the text yeah I
think so Jay David's had a follow-up
your reference to picking up signals
directly direct right relationship with
the world versus regurgitated ones
reminds me of Greene halls actual
thinking versus simulated thinking oh
yeah that's an interesting parallel
yeah I would have to I would have to
remind myself of the the specific ways
he's talked about those two and yet I
can I can kind of hint at the similarity
there and Skyler Skyler has a question
but he wants to hear your personal
definition of cult first before before
asking right so this is what I was
hoping to get into in in the the second
section here because I have quite a I do
syncretic definition of cult and and I I
had set up a whole plan of looking at
popular scholarly definitions of cult
where some of the problems are and what
I wanted to pose as a more useful
framing my definition of cult basically
comes down to it is the meeting ground
of phenomenology in sociology now or
where worldviews interface with social
groups and that is a very loose
definition however what I think it
allows us to do is to move the normative
boundary to the descriptor right so by
by highlighting what type of cult one is
is interfacing with we can actually
offer ourselves quite a bit more clarity
particularly in the cultural situation
we currently find ourselves in where
where you know everyone the meaning
crisis has everyone looking at everyone
else as if they are in a cult and so I
think we need to kind of like play with
this idea in a bit of a different way
then then we have in
but I make a much stronger argument for
that it in my notes at least this guy
did you want to ask your question
I'm sure I'm kind of referencing I guess
in my head especially called for seemed
to remind me a lot of the cult of the
individual and the more reconstitution
of society the kind of the the logical
limitations of that like how you can
take that argument really to an extreme
you said you kind of joined it for the
expressed goal of calling out the
 you saw in there yeah every
time the guy could kind of one-up you in
an argument so at a certain point kind
of fuel like there's or one down me he
could get underneath me right he could
always pull out the rug and that was not
a move I was familiar with alright
alright and yeah so that's kind of I'm
very interested in linguistics and how
that could play effect because it seems
like you have
an idea that's kind of floating around
the the server and idea is a domicile so
the lack of a home belonging writing
well-fitted together and it seems like
that group since they were so honed in
on attacking one another's positions you
figured oh here's where I could actually
get something done and the ground was
still not able to stay solid under you
so I was kind of wondering now that I've
heard your kind of definition of the
cult is kind of the meeting ground
between a personal phenomenology and how
the group can interact I think I can see
why the words so bitch there but yeah
this is wondering if any of the dama
side conversations have kind of clicked
with you and oh yeah yeah I you know I
even kind of directly brought this up
with verve a key during the bevery
conversation we had with him and and you
know the Dhamma side aspect I find very
important and and perhaps what
characterized that religious experience
that I was relating to before cult for
more than anything was this
extraordinarily deep sense of the relief
of Dhamma side that I was in some sense
home and always had been home and could
never not be home granted I eventually
found myself not home and I would say
that the the code for thing also played
on this dhamma side aspect in that it
was in some sense very much trying to
make a home in the participatory
and and in some sense remind people of
the home that they are in in existing in
the first place
granted they were able to make use of
that and kind of bend it towards
specific goals especially given more
time
as far as is Dom aside making people
extraordinarily easy to to manipulate in
this way III think that's likely
something that's very important as well
and perhaps also relates to what I was I
was saying there a moment ago about how
how the meaning crisis has everyone
viewing everyone else as being in a cult
to begin with and in some sense it's
almost like that's that's that's like a
projection of the others down the side
and how bizarrely there's almost this
sense of alienation in our claiming of a
group identity at all and then we seem
to have a negative individualistic
response to that in the disclaiming of
of another's group identity well that
was convoluted did that answer anything
sorry yeah
it really reminded me of something about
the the way we our solutions we kind of
fix on fix it on the solutions and later
of course they become our problems so
yeah that I can help help a lot so thank
you
excellent
Nik
how does it has it feel to have helped
me startup called number five point X
here on this court quite quite quite
terrifying and yet I also view it as in
some deep sense inevitable Nick how does
a help to have like gas me up as a
helping fight to sculpt five point X
with all the useful that's there we go
perfect the perfect dichotomy stations
everyone
I've laid down the rocks we're coming up
to two two hours
this has been just like absolutely
fascinating and did you have anything
else just on on this Nick that you
wanted to wrap up with or or did you
want to bring part one do it to a close
I'm trying to think it seems like this
is a good place to leave off we went
over the history we got to explore some
ideas within the context of my
experience I think it would be awkward
to try and squeeze in the etymology of
the word cult at this point and would
leave it off on an awkward note so yeah
I mean I don't think I have much else to
add here likewise I feel myself
unraveling a bit after having spoken so
much so I'm not sure how much longer I
will be useful you you've been
absolutely amazing I think and I echo
what was said before that you really
should write a book it's it's it's a
great story and I'm sure I'm sure
what you've told tonight it's just the
tip of the iceberg you can just tell
there's just this vast wealth of story
underneath you you don't you're inside
to it I mean I've heard lots of stories
about people from cults but yeah it's
your take 3 your insight like those
amazing thank you I appreciate the
appreciation I was just gonna say it's
always nice when these bits of our
stories particularly the more
destructive or experimental aspects are
able to be contextualized to and for
others as useful so some good well I
mean your your your experiences is
directly relevant to what we're trying
to do here and I think we're all
cognizant of the risk I've even had
people tell me what I tell them what
we're up to saying well how do you not
become a cult and you know it's it's
definitely a pretty high on my mind to
do to not become a cult so so yeah this
is this is very relevant we don't want
to become a cult we want to become a
religion we don't want to become a
called we want to become V thank you
everyone for being here we had a great
crowd tonight Thank You Manuel for
helping out with the recording and gonna
really try to get see what this Court
did to screw up all my settings and this
has been just great and we'll talk Nick
and schedule part 2 so thanks so much
everyone on to Edomites Nick yes
absolutely thank you all for for
listening and the interesting questions
as well appreciate it
thank you yeah
one is part two what was most casual
that and we'll put it up on the calendar
and excellent