so the question is this why is it now
that there's a vastly more popular sense
of the end of times the embezzling more
popular sense of bad things are
happening in a big way imminent doom
right and the short answer is is because
the the envelope in which we've been
held the I will call it the civilization
structure the the institutions that
we've been in they are affect actually
die yes right so there is there is a
moment that this phrase of like allowed
the dead word to be heard I'm glad
you're saying this because I heard an
interview with you and it sounded like
you're agreeing with the interviewers
proposition that climate change was the
thing or something that like we have it
was he was talking about why Game of
Thrones is so popular and it's such a
great sort of allegory for what's going
on right and you've got the white walls
and she was talking about climate change
being allegory for the White Walkers and
this incoming thing and I was thinking
well yeah there is that but the major
thing is the truth is that the system
that those aspects of the system are
dying right the old media is dying the
old politics is dying those things are
the things that are dying yeah yeah sure
in the archetype to the archetype of the
White Walkers is not climate change
they're kind of the white walkers is
when civilization Falls things get
uncomfortable that's not a good thing we
don't like it when that happens
those things are collapsing there is a
 great doom right right so you
know if you're as an individual human as
you grow up right there were it's time
to leave behind childish things well
from the point of view of the childish
things what that means is it's time to
die mmm from the point of view of the
South that is continue to go on is the
time to grow up
all right that's just always happened
that's just what it means for change to
occur some things literally just die
they go away forever in Tunis Hill well
in this case what's happening right now
is that gigantic chunks of what we have
thought it was kind of being the world
we've had this weird model that the
notion that when you're six you go to
kindergarten then you kind of toil
through primary school and then you go
to high school and you go to college and
they get a job is the world
all right and it's not and that's going
away all right so what's happening is
that people are perceiving because it's
becoming increasingly obvious that all
of these artifacts of the way that we've
gone about doing civilization in all the
different ways like pick your poison is
really matter because they're all kind
of tied together are breaking down and
failing in a way that is no longer easy
to pretend isn't happening and so as a
consequence this triggers a deep
visceral sense and that's a good thing
right because that deep visceral sense
is the return to the unlimited the
return to the mystery the return to the
the state which by the way in folks is
conversation human beings have
encountered this problem before we've
been in living in the valley yeah we've
had a situation where the the drought
has come and we need to leave well how
we deal with that is first and foremost
we drop the parts of us that wants to
stay where we are we allow the sadness
of change to occur and we process that
we feel something bad has occurred
danger is just emerged for sure like
leaving the the old fertile valley and
migrating across the desert is fraught
with danger and some of us may not make
it
but at the same time it activates in us
as well the call to consciousness the
call to gather together the call to
begin to actually become thinking in a
group and then into an adventure find
your heroes find your courage find your
your role by who you are in this place
and get deeply good at it find out how
to build real relationships with the
people around you have trust and have
the power and binding you get across
that desert no matter what happens and
then go and on this case did this had is
paradise or at least something really
awesome like it may not expect that will
in fact be a terminus and then end I
think it'll be more in the direction if
we get to go to Mars but it's a
God level it's another it's a whole
other level that's right that's right
- a whole load of the that we were
just dealing with before because we
thought that's just what the world was
yeah and it won't be there anymore that
means liquid saying earlier about each
sort of level generation less miserable
crap to deal with you have this huge
space in which you can be mighty yeah
yeah it's um what is the metaphor for
that what we haven't we have a metaphor
in biology it is the transition from
caterpillar to butterfly is the
metamorphosis yeah which is the classic
one
I was obsessed with that as a child it's
perfect it's perfect that's it that's
what's happening it's just butterfly
season in what I've seen of your stuff
you seem to lean more towards a idea
that we are doomed
you mentioned the setting you tell that
story because that was quite funny but
you meant oh I don't know this folks who
are who are experts in risk they've been
monitoring all the different forms of
risk and they were these would be world
experts in say nuclear proliferation the
risk of nuclear war or nuclear bombs
going off and then experts in like
disease global disease particularly
people deliberately designing germ
warfare and get it getting out and then
two or three more massive errors and and
each one of these individuals came up
and they were all and they're each
speaking in each one the theme was more
or less the same was or the the
the approaches that we currently take
the institutions that we have to police
these kinds of risks are barely holding
on by their fingernails right now and
the problem is continuing to get worse
which is it's kind of like the exact
inverse of the advantages of
decentralization so we could talk about
like the democratization of media in a
very positive sense and of course I
guess if you're currently in charge of
mass media it's negative but for
everybody else is mostly positive and we
can even talk about like the
democratization of genetic engineering
in a positive sense there's really
powerful stuff that comes out of it but
also there's a negative sense which is
that the things that used to be very
rare and used to be easy to control
because they were so rare as they become
widely available and still powerful you
know it's it's the kind of thing where
until and unless we invent some new way
of dealing with that if we're still
trying to manage it with the old
techniques they are very very dangerous
and when I guess for me that the real
the key inside is just is just this up
until I think I may we've talked about
this before but up until about 1947
human beings really couldn't it up
and disease could come and kill us or
you know family and can wipe us out but
even if we ward like crazy that World
War 2 style war just a tiniest blip in
our population even the Bronze Age
collapse which took out like seven major
civilizations still effectively non no
effect at all and the human
but around 1948 when the u.s. and the
Soviets both had H bombs we started
moving into the zone where we actually
could it up for everybody
like we could kill everybody and that's
just a new state and of course in 1948
that consciousness was a big deal like
oh wow this is this is a big deal we
need to be very careful about it and
over the next 50 or so years we got kind
of okay at not getting everybody killed
me remember there's some dodgy moments
there in the Middle where it seems like
it might not work out but the problem
was actually relatively small like we
literally all we had to do was prevent
in this case five or six people around
the world who were pretty well known
like the leaders of Nations and pretty
well monitored from pushing the button
simultaneously like even if just one of
us push the button and we could probably
still make it so we didn't think that's
the problem but as technology has gotten
more powerful and more decentralized
things like cyber warfare is a simple
example 15 years ago cyber warfare
didn't matter that much
who cares if a hacker shuts down the
computing grid in a major city but as
things like our electric systems and our
water systems and maybe even our
automotive transportation systems are
all on a computer grid one hacker one
unhappy hacker in one location could
shut down an entire city and that could
generate actual chaos like the cities
are large and the ability to rebuilt it
might being very hard and that's to say
nothing of something like say CRISPR
where that same group of kids maybe 20
well-resourced PhDs
could build a super gene virus that
could wipe out a billion people and
that's unprecedented right and so what's
happening is is that the magnitude of
the risk is now existential we can now
kill everybody and the kinds of things
that are in that magnitude are
proliferating and the difficulty getting
access to it is going down so that Ark
is a very bad arc like that that that
story ends badly in every in every in
every every way you tell it it ends
badly which is not by the way that say
that's tight it told many times as well
that's true is the thing yeah we have we
have heard it's kind of this story we
heard the most through like the sixties
through to semi recently right was this
the consciousness of tapping into that
deep the deepest of mythos of wait a min
we have as humans as a species we have
witnessed moments that at least to our
local try
we're apocalyptic we've had situations
where we all starve to death we've all
had a flood where something really
seriously back something so bad happened
that we still know about it 2,000 5,000
years later so we have that and so
nuclear war raised that energy and so
the positive side of the story is we
have that in us we have in us the notion
that that's the thing that happens and
we also have the notion of what the
right answer is we know how to respond
to it at least mythopoetic Lee and I
guess sort of your side of this story
which I bother would completely agree
with and believe in him that's all I
care about is focusing on going there is
that there's a mirror image yeah that
these same powers can be used for good
yes the difference I think right now is
that up until recently they could be
used for good now they must be used for
good yes which is which is I mean kind
of an imperative for us to transcend to
the level we need to get to to become
the species that we could be you need
those kind of stakes mm-hmm I like that
in our direction yeah yeah and in the
old balance no light without shadow etc
and no hero without the balanced villain
you need that motivation to be greater
and to go further and to be a better
version of yourself and you know a
better version of all of us together
because as you've talked about it takes
all of us working way harder and making
all of us way better together to be able
to combat those things nice I like that
so if you can imagine like taking these
these forces these these places that we
could go these poles of Heaven and Hell
right these intense moment modes and
then try to turn them into a tool as you
say that because motivation that the the
prospect that this hell is the thing
that lies in our future unless and this
prospect of this thing human is a thing
that lives in our future if and if you
can find a way to build in yourself the
capacity to relate to it in that fashion
meaning allow the notion of the prospect
of Hell unless to be a motivator not a
demotivator which is what I do have been
do
for a long time mm-hmm it kind of and it
seems silly not to
right yeah the the opposite leads to
what is it lead to misery and tragedy
and sorrowing and cancer and death the
opposite is a joyful existence in which
look around you look at this is glorious
 that we exist in that couldn't have
even been dreamed of by people a few
generations previous yeah it's
astounding isn't it like the the amount
of beauty and joy that we can witness
yeah just now
much less that we could witness is in
fact actually this town it is the kind
of thing that is only written about in
like poetry and mythology and it's
actually a present it's real yeah this
is a day-to-day light time and what I
find particularly encouraging is that
someone starting from this position like
I have a five year old kid I have a five
year old boy called Hercules who plays
roblox and minecraft and like and Lego
he plays Lego in the real world
he plays roblox and minecraft inside a
computer he has no limit to his
imagination for creation he sees no end
point of where he can't sort of like
create what's in his head and turn that
into a thing he lives in this lake
glorious paradise that his ancestors had
sort of sweated and died same as it gets
to the point of and like the idea that
that would all sort of collapse just at
that point of triumph kind of seems
silly like he and all of his little
brothers and sisters and your kids who
you were telling me a story about them
all working together on this minecraft
project like some incredible
hive mind yeah that's what will get us
through these things so this reminds me
of the the thing you're mentioning the
outside which was really interesting to
me I'd never heard it before I think
it's amazing is the you said
wholesomeness is the new Punk yeah and I
love that so I think this is the right
bridge because that's the energy that
you're talking about I've been thinking
a lot and talking a lot for a long time
about these cultural sort of shifts we
swing on a pendulum every 7 years
between punk nihilism and psychedelic
sort of hippy optimism and then there
haven't seen a grander scale the last
time that swung was or at the end of
2012 was the end of the last peak thing
and
people were talking about hey it's
staged alien invasions at the 2012
Olympics and things of that nature and
then it all got then everyone sort of
descended into complaining about you
know invasions of foreigners and things
of that nature we're going back into a
psychedelic territory the difference is
in this time is we've been through many
many sort of generations of rebellion
against the old order as it reminds me
of a spitting image sketch about Madonna
sort of how much more naked could she
get and then she pulls off all this skin
but it's like we've been through every
kind of rebellion the most rebellious
thing you can do right now is take
personal responsibility commit to a
person raise a family with that person
invest yourself fully in them being the
best they can possibly be like
wholesomeness is the most
countercultural rebellious thing you
could do right now like wholesome
earnest therefore wisdom ooh punk rock
and what's dope about that is that fixes
loads of problems if like on a mass sort
of scale everyone's good going okay
called the cool things to do right now
is to take personal responsibility and
invest the time and energy in making
myself the best version of myself I can
possibly be if people are doing that on
mass you don't even know what what the
effects of that could be it's because it
hasn't happened before and because the
Internet is here you have this on a mass
scale you have cultural icons like Ethan
in healer at age three about to have a
child and be the first sort of YouTube
wholesome family this is like this is
bigger than Mister Rogers this is way
bigger than most artists this is you're
seeing this from this from the ground
you see because these are two kind of
like Mimi edged lords kind of coming out
of the counterculture like growing up
and so we're in a place where the the
like the the tyrannical the rebellion
against the tyrannical king the
tyrannical king is quite obviously not
in charge in a deep way right there's a
was a phrase like Buddha died and it
took a thousand years before his shadow
was still being shown like yeah sure I
get it we can we can still sort of
identify a simulacrum of a tyrannical
King and to be sure there are sort of
like powerful
bad guys out there with with power but
the reality of the capacity of the
people to just choose to enter into a
new way of being is well it's there it
is simply there and the other thing that
I was thinking about is this concept of
wholesomeness is so it's so powerful
because there's when two different ways
you can go about making a good choice
like doing the right thing one way is
you can do the right thing because
you've been told it's the right thing to
do mm-hmm that's hard it sucks it's
fragile you're almost like struggling
against it you know it's like you eat
your broccoli and what's gonna end up
happening is eventually you're gonna
grow up and you're not gonna eat your
broth because the authority figure is
not there tell you which attendee the
 opposite as much as you can
right now if you actually folsom you're
eating your Brocket because it's the
right thing to do and it's easy it's
just a natural thing and so this builds
up from the bottom it's basically just
building it on a solid foundation and
you build it on the base and so okay I'm
gonna take responsibility and then I'm
gonna enter into a relationship with
another human being where I'm gonna take
responsibility for the relationship and
and with human being who's taking
responsibility for Mike is herself and
then we're gonna have a child together
responsibly and we're gonna take
responsibility for that child and we're
gonna start stepping out and taking more
responsibility for the place where we
live and where the child's my perhaps
going schooler is right humanity and and
not and not with a sense of like
powerlessness and therefore the sense of
either like that lashing out edge of I'm
powerless and the only way I can express
my anger at powerlessness is do that
shot but with the sense of okay how do
we do how do we do this and how do we
find other people with whom we
collaborate and can coordinate because
we can we can find them anywhere who are
willing to enter into honest
relationships with us to build these
things okay everyone's on that same
level everyone's parents divorced yeah
nobody wants that life don't wants to
die alone in an older person's home
that's so you can see that everywhere
now no one wants that that's the worst
thing that could possibly happen to you
what they what aside from nuclear
annihilation is better than that it is
actually I completely agree yeah vastly
better that notion of being completely
alienated from humaneness and dying in
that context is
abysmal we've now witnessed that we've
seen that experiment that happened and I
think you're right I think there's a
deep visceral sense I mean honestly I
feel how did I say this right I feel a
sense of like how can we actually help
the baby boomers get across that
threshold like how do we know they've
got to be absolutely terrified by the
recognition that the world that that
they live in that they've helped build
largely helped build is not one that
they want to be actually truly old and
die in and yet you know it's not yet
available we don't yet have the things
in place to allow them to have a family
and a community that is rich and can
meet human beings even as they move into
elder hood and then death but that is
clearly the thing that needs to happen
and I think we could all perceive that
all the way down to our you know in the
depths of our bones yeah yeah it's
pretty duck the the sort of the baby
boomer thing of oh they run around and
like had all the drugs and had all the
sex and then we're like right no more of
that for anyone else and now we're gonna
take over every industry possible and
we're actually not gonna give up any of
our jobs ever and we're gonna stay here
and we're gonna live till we're like 100
others that the ending isn't so nice for
them actually it's like a Scarface thing
yeah people always forget the ending of
Scarface we're like you know his sisters
like he gets she gets killed and it's
his fault and he dies and stuff people
just think about let the fun bit of
Scarface that's right yeah
the ending of Scarface is not a good
idea it's a moral lesson and the ending
of the boom is the potential ending of
the boom as is this is the saddest is
the sadder standing there is it's so
interesting because it is actually just
down to a choice yes like as individuals
and as a group they still have the
capacity to change the story so that's
the superpower is when you decide
because yeah you did the optimism thing
although the wholesomeness thing it's
just a decision and you decide it every
day and you acts on it every day every
day you go out and interact with the
world you could glare at someone you
could smile at them just the little
small tiny things like that are the
things that then ripple out and maneuver
and you have to be mindful all times
because
is very easy to get the trucks and
distracted from that path yeah and fall
into a rage or something pointless or -
to be brought down by a potential dark
possibility or whatever it is it's it's
a thing that requires much work and
purpose but purpose brings power without
purpose you're powerless something and
then it's depressing you feel like
but if you have purpose that's powerful
thing and if you go out and enact that
in the world and continue to do that
then it grows it grows exponentially
right and everyone around you is doing
it as well there's a whole bunch of you
doing it right howdy it's easier and
easier and more and more powerful yeah
it has the the characteristic that in
the technology world they call a
positive feedback loop or an exponential
what's called a network effect and it
happens in you first yeah you make if
you have to just make one choice and
then you can listen to the consequences
of how that choice is better than the
other choice and then as the basis of
that okay I'll make some more in that
vein to feel like that and go in that
direction then you get more clarity on
what that feels like to make those kinds
of choices and you get more courage
because if you have more hope that might
actually lead to better and you start to
see things working and the other
that works maybe this will work and then
that does work and then it becomes this
this practical real-world thing kind of
like I was saying earlier about the
minecraft generation just knowing
certain things work you know the the
dank meme community knowing that Chaos
magic works right knowing that so you
know this stuff works you know if you
put it into practice you will have good
results you'll feel good ever and around
you'll be good it's just and who would
choose to be to live in horror when you
could live in glory and wonder this is a
choice we're all making together right
now yeah hey gang and this is where
before we forget this point because we
realized this earlier and the be
exciting and all these cultural things
are very important you know what was his
name Andrew Breitbart would say that
politics is downstream from culture I
would say that everything is downstream
from culture absolutely chord strategy
for lunch yeah yeah so therefore it's
important and part of the whole story of
this new golden dawn is the
like the biggest thing in cinema is the
Marvel Cinematic Universe and these gods
reborn as archetypes rendered by a
splendid technology in such a fashion
that like we could never really like
imagined where people would have that
you know you would imagine a thing but
this is key there you can like touch it
and go in this it oh my god look at
these amazing it's flying it's
not like he's not lying on an ironing
board with a green screen it's like he's
 playing great and a Marvel have
just bought back Fox and it was like
Google getting the x-men back also means
they're getting back the Fantastic Four
and I was all excited because that means
that that Kirby stuff that which is
really really powerful Jack Kirby who
was connected to the unconscious and the
ether in a way that few humans ever
happened certainly in our lifetimes but
what did you point out what happens when
the Fantastic Four comes back into the
Marvel Cinematic Universe incredible
writers is that with like the x-men that
we've they have that whole story of
what's called the punk rebellion the
marginalized in the atomized and what
that feels like and with the Fantastic
Four it's a completely different feeling
it's different era right it's that
notion of hold from this oh it's
incredible yeah it's so funny I remember
that I for those people who grew up
weaned on pop culture as we did I I
certainly have had the continuous
experience of disappointment in our
storytellers failing to deliver on the
promise and by the way the obligation of
being the ones who actually create the
deep mythos the drive and orient our
lives yeah George Lucas sort of being
quite notable and then I noticed that
that the in the in the telling of the
Fantastic Four stories that have shown
up in Hollywood thus far I felt sad and
more sad than I would have thought I
should have felt like why do I feel sad
about that this revealed it like I
actually remember as a kid sitting down
or laying down and reading those comics
having a feeling of a connection to
family having a feeling of connection to
a sense of human wholesomeness to
community that it's funny it feels more
like mr. Rogers
it hasn't really existed since like and
I've almost missed that but I got it in
power pack and
read some of the older fantastic
possible power papers about the children
it was like and they're like they were
the kids and they were their parents
they loved their parents and they
respected them when it was like it's
very beautiful in that there were snacks
and these evil lizard demons anyway
they're the x-men thing kind of took
over yeah and it was that punk rebellion
nihilism against all these like little
factions and everyone but we've done
that that's the thing we've done that
now we've gone through that to the it's
very Adam we've kind of gone through
every kind of a little tribal thing what
do they call it in section yes that's
kind of broken everything down to the
thing where you go okay the smallest
like minority is the individual okay
we've done that bit that bit is done
it's now zoom it's fantastic for
time yeah and it's the family
together go into Mars go names
 space and defeating
Galactus yeah it's amazing and it's it's
interesting if you think about it that's
why they got it wrong when they did the
Fantastic Four in the past they were
trying to do it in the vernacular of the
x-men
they couldn't commit to the bit no there
was no context at the time it was the
wrong time yeah well you just can't do
Fantastic Four it's like they couldn't
do Superman right Superman hasn't been
done right for a long time that's right
Superman is far too wholesome Superman
is is a symbol of everything that
humanity could be if we got it
together yeah if we really got it
together and really believed in
each other and we really were the best
version of ourselves you know and he was
he got all that from his father his
earth father Park Kent who was just the
 just distillation of goodness
and like you know the past however many
years you couldn't tell that story cuz
no one wanted to hear it
it's like that was a joke yeah you know
 yeah guy being nice we've done
that we edge it ourselves
and so we could edgy no more obviously
I'm gonna put this I mean I haven't put
a star on this just precisely because of
probably poor calls and the wrong kind
of energy but this in some sense is the
Jordan Pederson story right he is he
comes in and he shows up and he shows up
as my man suppose a bit of a
northern Canadian a little bit more
austere version of a dad who wants you
to be better off right but at the end of
the day is but dad who wants to be
better off yeah he's here to help you
grow up and be a more fully meaningful
human at a point when that had been
completely for governor that was a thing
that anyone was supposed to do it so
evaporator point went days were like
hanging out pretending to be six Damien
at forties
yeah yeah absolutely and kids who are in
their sixties when they were 16 had no
idea what it meant to actually interact
with the man at all yeah never met one
and so that's it's so funny to see how
that archetype is returning and then BAM
you got your you got your Fantastic Four
so for those mavens who happen to
potentially be in control of this
particular piece of the Marvel Cinematic
Universe please find an artist who in
their heart and in their soul deeply
grasps the essence of that which is
supposed to be expressed through this
and allow this to be the vehicle that it
needs to be yeah and then the world will
be saved everything then then we can
save mankind everything move on right
you can get on with then we can get on
with Mars that's awesome