[Music]
welcome back to awakening from the
meaning crisis so we are continuing and
it deserves this much attention our long
discussion about the nature of wisdom
because since the actual revolution is
just crucially connected to the project
of meaning in life last time we finished
up look at bolton slaughtering there I
made some criticisms and that led into
important criticisms made by Monica or
Delta then we looked at our doubts
theory and the way it brought in an
important distinction about not just
having a good theory of wisdom but the
process of becoming a wise person and
then the emphasis on what are the
features of a wise person as - as
opposed to what are some of the central
claims made by a theory of wisdom and
then we talked about how Monica
insightfully brings together and the the
cognitive the reflective and the
affective and I pointed out how within
at least the cognitive directly because
of the invocation of Keeks and
understanding we've got a relevance
realization grasping the significance I
would also point out that I think that's
at least even complicit in the
reflective machinery and there's
potential deep potential connection
there with both prospective all-knowing
and the cultivation of rationality at
least respectable rationality and the
affective ties to agape which I've
already argued too has very important
connections to relevance realization and
that affords our doubts theory a
powerful way of connecting wisdom to
meaning in life as something different
from connecting wisdom to virtue and
that's a very important thing to do we
still noted some criticisms but largely
it's still a product theory it doesn't
have an independent account of
foolishness and a processing theory of
how one becomes wise and in that sense
it's not picking up as well as it could
the philosophical heritage given to us
by people like Socrates and Plato and
Aristotle and Marcus Aurelius etc
we then took a look at the theory of
Sternberg just extremely pivotal figure
in the psychology the cognitive science
of wisdom and we took a look at his
theory and I pointed out his ideas about
adopting shaping and selecting are
clearly ideas about relevance
realization he invokes implicit
processing tacit knowledge you know in
order to bring understanding in that in
sort of intuitive grasping of the
significance of information I think is
what he's implying and we talked about
the how he involves a balancing of
interests and there's the interpersonal
how you connected to yourself the
interpersonal how you connected to other
people the extra personal how you
connected to the world
and so that's at least important
connections to implicitly at least I
mean important connections to meaning in
life that we've been talking about
throughout this course he invokes
balance throughout and I tried to make a
good case that you should see that as
optimization and directly relevant
therefore two accounts of optimization
of processing that we discussed with
connection to relevance realization
there were some issues I had with
Sternberg the idea that all wise people
all of this machinery is directed
towards the common good that strikes me
as an Akron estate I think a less
contentious claim would be that it's
directed towards virtue and meaning in
life for oneself and others in some
unspecified way there was also the
invocation of values as affecting or
constraining the whole process again it
was unclear to me what this is there's
an ambiguity here it could be the
relatively trivial claim that the wise
person is being regulated by normativity
you know by considerations what's true
and good and beautiful and that would be
definitional because wisdom is a
normative term
and therefore relatively trivial or it
could be that specific values are being
invoked here but if that's the case they
should be specifically stated and then
justified for why those ones are chosen
and explicitly explain how those
specific values make an impact on
specific aspects of the machinery so
that's all sort of missing and needs to
be addressed
it's ultimately a product theory not a
process theory
Sternberg does have a theory of
foolishness but it's not independently
generated and it doesn't really pick up
on the centrality of seeing through
illusion and into reality so if you'll
allow me to make use of all of that
machinery not only the machinery that
we've talked about in the psychology of
wisdom but the machinery that many of
these theorists are either explicitly or
implicitly invoking all of the
philosophical work we already covered in
the first half of the course connected
to wisdom I want to try and humbly draw
upon that and talk about proposal made
by myself and Leo Ferraro if you know
remember Leo and I have done work
together on flow which I've talked about
work on mindfulness that I've talked
about this is worth from 2013 so the
place to start is to go back to what we
saw and what a argued for so I hope I
don't have to recapitulate that whole
argument right that we have these two
competencies we have sort of an
inferential competence that has to do
with our propositional knowing and we
have an insight competence right over
here and that has to do with control and
that has to be that's more sort of
procedural perspectival I'll come back
to that point because that's one of my
criticisms of Verve achey and Ferraro
and then the idea here is that this is
enhanced
and protected from undue influence from
sort of more s1 processing by active
open-mindedness and then I argued and
following Jacobs and Teasdale right and
also arguments derived from being the
need for an independent competence on
controlled etc right that while this is
really clearly the case for theoretical
context and more therapeutic or at least
extent X essentially developmental
contexts we want this to be foreground 8
and we want it protected from that and
so we want it developed by mindfulness
really and you understand that by
mindfulness I mean a style that
coordinates psycho technologies together
of meditation contemplation perhaps flow
interaction with the environment that
brought up the immediate question of
okay how are these coordinated together
now one answer might be that they are
just opponent processing and there are
self-organizing and and and that's
potentially viable but there's we
already at this point sorry that sounds
so self congratulatory I don't mean it
that way
okay we argued let's just state it that
way we argued that whereas this is
giving priority to propositional
knowledge this has to do with procedural
knowledge skills of attention
basically with cultivating certain
skills of attention and then the idea
was that active open mindedness and
propositional knowing basically we
argued then give you knowledge of facts
this this gives you knowledge of events
right or processes so right this
basically tells you about we're
understanding what a fact is as cross
contextual patterns events or processes
are things that are unfolding like
idiosyncratically right in time and
space I'm not I mean I that's sort of
right perhaps a better way of putting
this that would align it with the stuff
we talked about with
it's worked and sharp is this is your
grasping of principles and this is your
grasping of processes and this would
therefore largely be sort of like what's
being talked about in Sofia and this is
largely what perhaps what was being
talked about in phronesis we suggested
that I'm still open to that suggestion
I'm not quite sure that it Maps as
cleanly as that now but in addition to
this clearly propositional and at least
centrally procedural we invoked
prospective oh right so this is
propositional this is largely procedural
and then this is perspectival and then
right so if this has to do with
inference this has to do with insight
and we've already got a good sense we've
seen this we didn't we were not aware of
cuz it hadn't been generated we are not
aware of Grossman's work at the time but
we knew the Berlin work and this is of
court what's being managed here is
internalization how do you learn to take
adopt and take other people's
perspectives and internalize them within
your own processing so they become
metacognitively effective and then we we
said well what perspectival knowing did
and here's where I want to launch or
what am I I think first criticisms we
said well what perspective knowing does
is it integrates knowledge of facts with
knowledge of events it sort of helps you
to use I think maybe a better language
it helps you to put principles into
process and have processes governed by
principles and that's what sort of
perspectives are doing so this is we're
talking about the the epitome of this as
a skill and the epitome of this is a
theory and what a perspective does is
put theories and skills together I think
that's kind of right still in a sense
but
I think the relationship is and this is
a what I would argue for here the
relationship is more like this the
propositional knowledge is grounded in
but affected by procedural knowledge
your skills knowing how to interact and
then that this your your ability to
cultivate skills and then apply them to
the propositional knowledge is grounded
in your perspectival knowing because
that's going to give you your
situational awareness that you need to
cultivate the skills and so that you can
apply your knowledge of principles and
then I would argue that that and you've
seen me make this argument before this
is ultimately grounded in your
participatory knowing the agent arena
attunement that affords your being in
the world and your ability to go through
modal transformation existential change
so that also brings up I might as well
mention it now another criticism of this
of this theory which is although it's
talking about propositional and
procedural knowledge and prospective
unknowing there there is no clear
discussion here of participatory knowing
and that's a significant lacunae in the
theory for the following reason
without an account of participatory
knowing for all of its claims the verve
a keen for our theory of being a process
theory rather than a product theory
without talking about the participatory
knowing it really can't incorporate into
its account of becoming wise how one
goes through transformational experience
how one goes through modal change
I mean modal in the existential sense
not the logical sense
so without connecting participatory
knowing to this overarching schema the
connections between wisdom
transformative experience altered states
of consciousness all of these things
that we've discussed are actually
crucially missing from this theory and
therefore its claim to being an adequate
process
theory can be rather significantly
challenged I own I think that that so
that needs important development we did
talk about a cognitive style that you
could cultivate and one more thing I
think what we were doing is also we were
smuggling in that the prospective
all-knowing with the process of identity
creation that's central to participatory
knowing so I think that was also part of
the problem now what we did argue is
that this is set within a cognitive
style that will give you a higher-order
way of regulating active open mindedness
and mindfulness and here we took
directly from the philosophical
tradition and we talked about
internalizing the sage right
internalizing Socrates internalizing the
Buddha internalizing Jesus internalizing
the sage and we talked about what what
impact that has so we you know what this
is internalized we talked about this
repeatedly what the process of
internalization is what it's like to
internalize Socrates etc etc and we've
already seen how central that is to
wisdom it's so well this is overcoming
fallacious reasoning right
this is overcoming miss framing
misconstrue
what this is doing is it's helping you
to overcome egocentrism in a powerful
way these are all ways in which we can
fall into illusion so it's
self-deception but we also talked about
what does internalizing the sage do
what's when you get that meta cognitive
enhancement you get that perspective of
ability what's it doing so here we
talked about a virtue that you haven't
heard me talk about very much and it's
it's unfortunate because in some ways
this this this is okay so the the Asia
Greeks had four cardinal virtues wisdom
which is really kind of a meadow virtue
justice which we talk a lot about
courage and then the fourth is this word
softer son now softer son is often
translated as temperance doesn't capture
it well moderation doesn't capture it
well so I want to to put aside that and
try and come back at this but you see if
you went to the Delphic Oracle there
were things inscribed on the wall there
and one was know thyself and that's
clearly you know connected and Socrates
made it a zone and we've come to know
what that means how the knowledge of
one's self is of course not they're not
romantic autobiography but a deep
understanding of the principles by which
you're operating but the other one was
everything in moderation which was like
this and it but that's not right that
again moderation is good but it's not
quite right it's and we know this is
connected to something like Aristotle's
notion of the golden mean that all
virtue and remember what that is you
tried to create you're trying to create
a virtual engine that right right
generates enough options so you don't
suffer vices of deficit but also
generates enough right there's enough
governance there's enough selective
constraints so that it also forts vices
of excess so there there's there's a
kind of optimization going on there and
as I said there which you get a little
bit in the word moderation but modern
raishin sounds more like averaging and
settling i we argued that there's a
better way of trying to understand this
by understanding it in something that it
was often contrasted which which is in
Crotty a-- so you know this word this is
democracy uh right power or rule by the
people and and krithia is sort of
exercising power on yourself so this is
kind of like self-restraint self-control
and so a way of getting at this is to
think about the the fact that you could
be practicing a virtue a virtue and
kradic lee or in a sort of cynic manner
let me give you an example so here's two
people there's Tom and there's Susan Tom
is honest or at least he's trying to
become honest no Tom goes into
situations and Tom sees clearly the
potential to lie and he thief clearly
the benefit that would accrue to him if
he lies and it comes with a tremendous
sort of temptation at there's a
tremendous impulse and so he exercises
self-control and he doesn't lie and Tom
is to be commended for that that is an
important kind of honesty but consider
Susan Susan comes into a situation she
clearly sees the opportunity to live
she clearly sees the advantages that
were the crew to her if she lies but
that's it it's like when we talked about
Frankfort and whether or not some it's
unthinkable to her not in this sense
that she can't think the thought I can
lie or think or imagine to herself like
it's not a viable option to her she
can't she can't get into the existential
mode where that draws on her
anyway so although she can think it in
one sense in a Frankfort Ian sense it is
unthinkable to her it just she's not
tempted to lie in that sense many of us
myself included would side with the
Greeks and saying susan is more honest
than Tom right because honesty is now
second nature to Susan in a way it isn't
to Tom so that's soft resan but at least
one aspect of it
do you remember we you you see that
remember when we were doing Paul and
agape and Paul says now I will show you
the most excellent way and then he's
talking of course about agape as the
most excellent way and then he says
remember in order to try and get you to
understand that the transformation when
I was a child I thought like a child I
spoke like a child that acted like a
child but when I became a man I put
childish things behind me and remember
we talked about that when your child
your your deeply tempted by toys your
salience landscape automatically
organizes in a certain way but when
you're an adult when I'm a man I come in
and I see Spencer's toys I know that
they're there I know that I can play
with them but they have no pull on me
they do not call me they do not tempt me
and as the child is to the adult the
adult is to this age this age has a
salience landscape in which they are not
tempted to self-deception in the ways
that we so readily are that's soft
person it is to have a salience
landscape that has gone through a kind
of fundamental reversal it is not I mean
these are all differences of emphasis
but like the way our seance landscape is
less oriented towards the self
deceptiveness of a child the sages
salience landscape is less oriented
towards our prevalent and pervasive
forms of self-deception they see through
illusion and into reality
so this is of course deeply perspectival
and and I want to add a little bit more
to it because it it's not just write it
sorry you see the seat like in Taoism it
comes through right
the idea that right well look once
you've trained enough you just have to
you just have to let you the sage can
just let things unfold naturally
and you see this and you know even in
Augustine you know love God and then do
what you want of course you have to love
God it that means if you really truly
love God if agape is flowing through you
as paul recommends then you have
sovereign and then you will just you
will and this is what I want to say you
will be tempted to the good you will be
tempted just like you can be tempted
right your salience landscape naturally
self-organizes towards self-deception
your salience landscape if you're wise
naturally self-organizes towards seeing
through illusion zeroing in on what's
relevant and important and how it is
relevant to the project of becoming more
virtuous and having a more meaningful
life you're tempted you're naturally
tempted to the good that's some person
and so we argued that what's what you're
doing here is your call to you know you
are internalizing the sage and what
that's doing is helping to overcome ego
centrism in this deep sense of helping
you to realize software son and so this
means we argued that there's deep
connections and I don't think these have
been explored enough between wisdom and
sorrow soon and of course our forsen is
a kind of optimization of your
perspective of knowing it's that I've
optimized my perspective all knowing so
it's always certain service and this is
what was to some degree missing from
this theory right it's in the service of
my agent arena relationship and how that
is being developed being developed that
reciprocal realization so that I can go
through the import
transformations that are needed to
become a wise person we argued that what
the softer sin is directed towards were
three M's obviously morality more
broadly construed as not just knowing
the rules but the capacity for being
virtuous realizing meaning in life now a
deficit there is we only we only had
self-determination Theory ricey and DC
and Ryan on this kind of stuff and much
more work much more significant work has
been done with meaning life working on
doing with tally of rancid Asst Jensen
Kim for the grass wick and we're
presenting at APA this year and so this
theory needs to be revised and I've
tried to show you that in the course to
more directly connect this machinery to
meaning in life so this needs
significant improvement we did argue
that meaning in life is irreducible alla
wolf to morality and then something we
talked about as mastery we use the three
ends because they're helpful we did I'm
not I'm not comfortable that term
anymore because of all of its political
connotations we were thinking of it more
like in almost in the academic sense
like when you get your MA on the end and
when you know in the oldest sense like
when you did your masterpiece what we
met here was you know a terrific
capacity for caring and coping with
reality you had sets of skills you had
sets of psycho technologies you had
sense of roles that you could take so
this gives you roles like propositional
sorry propositional knowing gives you
rules your procedural knowing gives you
you know various routines this is a
perspectival knowing gives you various
roles and being able to use you know
rules and routines and roles you know
with with mastery in coping and caring
was central again always guided under
the governance under the regulation of
sovereign
so I've already I I mean so this is a
processing account
you how to become wise you cultivate
active open-mindedness you cultivate
mindfulness you cultivate internalizing
this age we used sports psychology here
as a way of trying to get what that
looks like or we also used of course
developmental psychology but got ski but
sports psychology talks about very much
how people go through a process of
internalizing the coach and that's
strongly analogous to internalizing this
age and so we talked about you call
debate active open mindedness you
cultivate mindfulness you cultivate
internalizing this age and you're guided
overall by trying to become softer cynic
in that and so this is a processing
theory as I've mentioned I think there's
a deficit in it it does not take you
into account it it's what's absent from
it is transformational experience
transformational development these are
all very telling things the role or
relationship between this and altered
states of consciousness who is not
properly developed the participatory
knowing which of course connects to the
transformational experience is missing
so wisdom is not connected to gnosis and
here in any important way so those are
some important criticisms I would have
the relationship between the kinds of
knowing wasn't well developed we sort of
just argued that well perspective on our
sort of synthesizes these together I
think that's too simplistic a much more
complex relationship I you see me argue
for in this course I think needs to it
is being developed and needs to be
developed two things that were strongly
implicit in other people I should
mention a core aspect of this theory
that I think is still central is that
all of this all of this and we made this
very explicit all of this is and this
came out I
so part of this conversation that I
forgot to take a moment and explicate it
that all of this is about enhancing
relevance realization our main argument
is that wisdom is some kind of
comprehensive optimization of cognition
and then I would extend that now
consciousness character etc and that in
order to optimize cognition in a
comprehensive fashion and of the
developmental fashion that means that
what you're doing is enhancing relevance
realization and we all we all ready saw
that at work throughout this and we saw
that relevance realization is central in
the theories that the explicit
psychological theories that we've
already examined now in connection with
that there's another serious
lacunae in this theory which is that
although it does something I think this
is very important it connects wisdom to
to insight let's start here I mean it's
it's it would be odd to say you know Sam
is very wise but he's not very
insightful that seems wrong we could we
could say things like you know Sam is
very wise and he's maybe not very
educated he might not be sort of super
intelligent that's fine right but to say
that Sam is wise and not insightful well
that seems to trespass on that McGee and
barber point about seeing through
illusion right wisdom definitely has to
do with you know gaining knowledge in
the best way theoretical knowledge
obviously gaining procedural knowledge
so the wise person knows how to believe
well and that seems also deeply deeply
right the the wise person is overcoming
ego centrism
internalizing the sage the traditions
point to this very clearly and they
point towards software son the most
excellent way and and of course one way
in which this we could understand this
is exactly the Paul line recommendation
right that the best form of software sin
is agape
so but what's missing so I've already
pointed many things a minute but
something that central here is a theory
of understanding to say that you know
like Oh bill is very wise he's so
insightful
he's you know he's so capable of
self-transcendence and overcoming ego
centrism he believes things really well
like he's not easily duped but he
doesn't understand he doesn't have deep
or profound understanding of things see
no no that's not right why speak one of
the ways people zero in on relevant
information is by being more insightful
yes one of ways they zero in on relevant
information is like like avoiding bias
and fallacy in their inferential changes
of their beliefs right one way in which
they over write one way in which they
zero in on relevant information and
overcome egocentrism is all of the the
respect rival internalization the
cultivation of sovereign but what's
missing and we saw this you know our
delt work very clearly we saw it implied
in Sternberg's
and so right we should have taken this
into account wisdom should also have
within it a clear theory or connected to
a clear theory of understanding and so I
think that's also missing what is it to
enhance understanding what is it to
develop a profound understanding so I
want to try and at least discuss that or
not I'm not in the place where I have a
complete theory of understanding I've
been doing a lot of work on it work that
I'm actually doing with Leo Ferraro and
I and because that theory is still very
much a work in progress I'm also not
clear quite how right it would fit into
this what would be the cognitive style
for tapping into the participatory
knowing and how does that relate to
enhanced under
Danny I'm not sure I don't know I don't
know
so the criticisms have shown me many
ways in which there's important lacunae
there's things that are underdeveloped
and things of which I am ignorant
however and I'm going to try and address
the understanding issue in a moment I
would like to say nevertheless we we can
see how all of the theories right
converge including this one on relevance
realization intelligence rationality
these different kinds of knowing and
integrating them together optimization
they're all zeroing in on this so that
we see remember back to this old diagram
everything converging onto our R and
then coming out into all these aspects
of human spirituality and here's one
I've made I think a plausible case for
that it really helps plays a crucial
role in helping us to give a
naturalistic account of what wisdom is
that I think I made a plausible case for
now what about understanding well we
already saw it invoked with this
grasping of significance and it's
interesting in a completely independent
and convergent manner when you look
through a lot of the current philosophy
of understanding this is where people
are now distinguishing understanding
from knowledge distinguishing
understanding from just possessing an
explanation because of an explanation as
a set of propositions right so there is
the idea that understanding is something
beyond possessing an explanation
it's something above and beyond simply
knowing we already saw with Keeks this
idea of grasping the significance and I
pointed out to you that that could be
understood in terms of control and
relevance realization what I am saying
is if you take a look at the philosophy
understanding literature this idea that
understanding goes beyond knowledge and
explanation in the grasping of the
significance of the knowledge is
something to which you can make you can
draw a quite powerful convergence
argument many people are converging on
this idea there's there's some variation
on what they think right what they think
this grasping the significance is I
think to go back to smellin right that
it has to do like we saw with grasping
the relevance of what you know that he
remember that was one of the key
features of his account of understanding
so in addition to all the implication
relations and logical relations
there were relations of relevance non
propositional and then I argued that
that construal plays a central role and
that control can be understood in terms
of problem formulation the relevance
realization machinery that's found
within problem formulation so I would
argue that what we're talking about is a
particular is a really good construal
and we have a way of talking about that
already right we have the notion of an
optimal grip I have a really good con
stool has a structural functional
organization I've sized up the situation
well you know featural to get all the
right degree of transparency opacity I'm
getting an optimization on my grip on
things so this is good contact right
that's the good control and then what it
does is it affords me to write to grasp
the the the what's relevant in this
situation how I sized up the situation
and got an optimal grip on it affords
remember inmates and good problem
formulation right now we also saw
something else if you remember we the
connection to good problem finding and
that's what I talked about the problem
nexus and I promised to come back I
talked about Arland but I also mentioned
at that point the work of very recent
work all my markers are running out of
two reget and I've never met this person
so I hope I get their name right I just
want to copy this very carefully
Pittsburgh I'm not sure if that's right
or not this is work from 2017 and then
there's also direct
own book on understanding and there's a
lot of good work going on about this
it's very exciting stuff they point
towards what they call the standard of
effectiveness for understanding I
understand something
what's the contrast here okay you don't
want to say that somebody has understood
something and what that means is they've
they've grasped from the truth now they
they have to be trying to grasp the
truth that's important but and and that
will come out in a moment right
but you can't say well if they didn't
grasp the truth they don't understand
because then you're faced to say the
following thing that you know most
people have never understood anything
because most people's beliefs in the
past are faults and most of my beliefs
right now are fault so I'm actually not
understanding you don't want to try
understanding too tightly to truth in
that fashion so instead of trying tying
it to truth you might want to try it
more to something like rationality where
you are trying right you're using the
best methods for trying to get out the
truth that's more plausible and this
would also help to explain why in the
prototypical instances within science we
use things that aren't true in order to
generate understanding you go at you
open a science textbook and they'll show
the atom with this little circle and
things going around it right and that's
all that's pretty much completely false
it doesn't matter that it's false it is
effective for helping you to grasp the
significance of the scientific model of
the atom to draw as journey AK would say
the right implications look for the
right connections it helps you zero in
on the relevant information in the right
way and that's why it's used nobody
right you're making a mistake if you
think most of the diagrams and the
idealizations that are at work in
science are attempts to represent the
truth accurately they are not they are
attempts to effectively get you to zero
in on the relevant implications make the
relevant connections as mental and would
say this is what is meant by
effectiveness all right effectiveness is
exactly doing and then they talk about
how what what it is to say that somebody
understands something is that they're
good at you know being able to apply
their knowledge right find new domains
open up new areas of research so of
course it's this multi apt ability to
apply what they're they're good problem
formulation here to transfer it and
transform it and specify it in many
different ways and what's implied in
here of course is in
important capacity for problem finding
somebody who has good understanding can
facilitate a need for they can motivate
and facilitate a need for cognition
because they can use that to go out and
find and formulate problems perhaps zero
in an important important problem Nexus
so and of course this optimal grip is
giving me something that regret the
regret or dirige it i don't know how he
pronounces his name also talks about a
many people talk about the idea that
understanding is contextually sensitive
it's contextually relative to know that
I understand something is relative to
the situation at hand and relative to
the person at hand you and I can both
know the same things right but if you're
in situation in situation you're in
situation a in situation B you might
understand those things because you can
apply them in a I know I couldn't be
said to understand them as well cuz I
can't apply them in situation B also
right we could be in the same situation
but I have a different set of skills and
so I can apply my knowledge better than
you can I understand better than you can
right so there's very much that this is
context relative and I would then of
course context sensitive and you write
and that of course is the context
sensitivity whereas this is the ability
to do things in a much more context
general way and of course I'm invoking
the machinery of relevance realization
I'm invoking in in in good control and
then the ability to transfer it right
insightfully
I would also argue that one more thing
is needed right and you know where this
because we've already got the idea that
when if I am making these kinds of
forward commitments cognitive
commitments they need to be backed by a
law of convergence so that my construct
is also trustworthy I've done a lot and
of course to overcome self-deception
so if basic understanding is to grasp
the significance grasp right through
relevance realization the relevant
implication the relevant connections
right this is what I'm trying to suggest
to you the basic understanding becomes
profound understanding when basic
understanding is used to generate
plausibility
I don't think that's enough because if
you'll allow me a sort of schematic way
of putting it this is very horizontal it
tells you how to bring different domains
right together into your good Const role
and then apply them to many domains and
you're doing the compression right and
then you're doing the variation you're
doing the relevance realize the
compression variation right good problem
formulation optimal gripping right this
is contextual e sensitive this is
effectively right applied across in a
cross contextual manner etc etc right
but I think understanding also has if
you'll allow me a vertical domain
because I think part also of what
profound understanding does is it aligns
and optimizes the relationship but so if
this is plausibility generation what's
being aligned and optimized here I think
are right the propositional knowing
right the procedural perspectival and
the participatory
I mean this goes back right somebody who
really knew physics wouldn't just be
grasping the propositions of physics
they would be able to they'd have the
skills they know how to do physics and
they'd have the situational awareness
they would know you know which skills to
apply and which skills to develop in
order to do physics well there might
even be a participatory aspect to it
they might have come to identify with
the physicalist worldview and taken up
their agency with respect to that
although that might be problematic given
arguments from the meaning crisis but
the the more there's right so the more
deeply these are aligned and
interconnected and mutually facilitating
each other the more capable they are I
would say of understanding the material
so I think what needs to be developed is
a way of theoretically integrating the
horizontal that understanding is to
generate at least profound understanding
is to take basic understanding grasping
the relevance connections and make those
relevance connections convergence and
elegance optimal gripping so that
profound understanding is to generate
plausibility that's the horizontal but
profound understanding is also to align
so you're getting grounding downward and
you're getting emergence upward right
the relationship between propositional
knowing procedural knowing prospective
all-knowing and participatory knowing
and then all of that needs to be of
course integrated into an account
of wisdom
as I said what also needs to be aligned
is transformational experience and that
means an account of nasus needs to also
be integrated into the account of wisdom
so
that notion of transformative of
transformation of knowing through
transform transformation and becoming so
that knowing and becoming knowing
oneself and knowing the world and
becoming a different agent in a
different arena bound together right
we've talked about this that
transformative knowing that
transformative experience there's of
course many instances in which it's
rather sudden or somewhat sudden and I
and so it has very much important
features of insight and we've taken a
look at that and that of course is again
to recommend it one more time the
seminal and powerful work of the LA paul
now agnes card in her book aspiration
has I believe it's 2016 has recently
argued that there are also instances
where people go through this
transformative knowing that are much
more incremental in nature
she doesn't deny this but she argues
that there are very many instances about
this so all of the the all of the stuff
we talked about here hasn't been
dispensed with this is being added as a
complement and a supplement so what's an
example of this more incremental process
she gets she gives many examples let's
do one you join a music appreciation
class okay and so we're using the word
appreciation here not in the sense of
gratitude but how it's used when we
people talk about music appreciation art
appreciation so you joining music
appreciation for class class what would
make you a good student and the music
appreciation class if you're there
because you want to impress your
girlfriend or your boyfriend or you're
there because every time you go you pass
the chocolate store and you buy some
chocolate right and that sort of or
you're there because you're just trying
to get a credit the person teaching the
music appreciation is not going to
regard you as a good student because why
because the goal of music appreciation
is to come to value music for its own
sake it's it's to come to front it is to
come to finding music intrinsically
valuable and therefore something that is
directly relevant to your meaning in
life something that you directly care
about now the thing is if you were a
good now think of the paradox here and
this is so beautiful the way keller
brings it up if I was a good student I
would appreciate music for its own sake
but if I appreciated music for its own
sake I do not need to take the music
appreciation class right do you see the
paradox here and then Keller points it
this is the same thing when you decide
you're going to undertake a liberal
education the liberal education is going
to give you values and preferences that
you don't currently have right so the
idea is the music-appreciation so what
do you do there how do you how do you
break through that dilemma now let's be
very clear
colored is in agreement with la paul
that you can't get through this in an
inferential fashion for all of the
arguments we've already seen right she
talks about it she does make something
clear that I don't think this is clear
in Paul's work she talks about the fact
that this process this process of trying
to acquire right an appreciation for
something as intrinsically valuable she
calls this process aspiration where you
might call this process more inspiration
the sudden insight right inspiration
versus aspiration
so you're aspiring and she points out
something that I think is really clear
that this has to be a forum this has to
be something that can be seen as a
rational process now of course there's
ways in which we can screw this up but
what she wants to argue is that there's
a form of rationality appropriate to
aspiration she calls it proleptic
rationality probably like when you gave
when you were doing proleptic things in
the ancient world you were trying to
encourage people right to call today
particulars or values
the rationality why because if we were
to say that the person who is engaged in
aspiration who is trying to become
somebody other than they are to go
through the transformative experience to
have a perspective on knowing a
participatory knowing that they do not
currently have if we were to say right
and because they're not operation they
cannot do that inferential e they cannot
use decision theory to do that if we
just say oh therefore they're irrational
notice the paradox we fall into because
we would have to we would have to
conclude this that if I am aspiring to
rationality because you have to
that would be an irrational thing to do
if I'm aspiring to virtue that would be
an irrational thing to do if I decide to
take up a liberal education to become a
better person a different better person
then that would be an irrational thing
to do on pain of kind of a not a
propositional contradiction but a
performative contradiction remember we
talked about performative contradiction
this to call that irrational would be a
performative contradiction my aspiring
to rationality has to be itself a kind
of rationality
that's proleptic rationality or to use
something older my loving of wisdom my
loving of wisdom by aspiring to becoming
wise cannot itself be an irrational
process it has to be rational not
inferential rational for sure so first
of all she does that excellent work of
saying look this is we've got to broaden
our notion of rationality to include
aspiration I would argue we have to
broaden our notion of rationality to
include inspiration as well and that's a
way in which I'm being radically sort of
reconstructive of Romanticism so now the
issue becomes what's going on here well
I'm going through a process of identity
change
transformative experience participatory
knowing right and here's where is where
coloreds work is a little bit lacking
because well she makes a very good case
for aspiration and very very good case
that for the nature of aspiration that
it's proleptic Li rational she doesn't
give us very much towards a psychology
of aspiration and that's of course
perhaps because she's a philosopher she
does offer a couple of cues let's go
back to the music-appreciation so I want
to be I want to and think about how this
connects to Sophos in trying to tempt
yourself into the good but you could you
got to do it in this tricky way and
think about also how it's related to
gnosis and trying to get out of the
existential entrapment so what I got to
do is I've got to give myself I got to
have a value that will get me currently
engaged here's here's my frame now it'll
get me currently engaged with music
right but I will be able to give up that
value right when I actually value music
for its own sake so you see what's going
on here
you need to she calls it a placeholder
but it's actually in our sense it's a
symbol it's something that connects the
future you and its way of life or your
way of life to the to the current you
and it does it by having this
double-faced not duplicitous because
you're aware of this that's what makes
it a rational process this right this
double phase thing so right I'm a right
go to the music class because I
currently have the value of sort of
making myself do things that I find
difficult right now that's not the same
value as appreciating music but I do
that right on with the understanding
that right that is temporary that is to
try and get me into a liminal place
where I can start to play with what it's
like to value music for its own sake to
enter that world you can see right the
connections
to gnosis here you can see the
connections to symbolic enactment here
aspiration is deeply bound up I would
argue with gnosis and then something
that Callard doesn't talk at all about
but we've already talked about
I think aspiration is deeply connected
to wonder wonder gets you to question
almost like Socratic aporia your world
view your sense of self it opens up and
it motivates you right it opens you up
and motivates you to go through
aspirational change I think if you have
a wonderful kind of gnosis that's got
the appropriate placeholder in place
that's the beginnings of a psychological
account of how we can go through
aspiration so I think we can bring what
was needed for a theory of wisdom
because of course philosophy ah we
aspire to wisdom and and we always
aspire to wisdom because to claim and
this is a deep point that we've achieved
wisdom is kind of a mistake so we need
an account of understanding an account
right of gnosis and and these are all
related and an account of aspiration we
need them to be further explicate it
integrated and then integrated with the
of the accounts of wisdom that I've been
arguing for already okay I want to try
and draw this all together now so I'll
point to what's going on because I'm
going to need more time I'm gonna need
time from the next episode to try and
draw this all together what I want to do
in the drawing together is I want to try
and draw this all together into an
account of what wisdom is I'll say what
this is now so and I'll just leave you
completely hanging but I want to come
back and develop it and then I want to
try and connect this notion of wisdom
back to enlightenment and back to
responding awakening from the meaning
crisis here's the account of wisdom I'm
going to leave you with and then I'm
going to come back and try and at least
defend a develop and defend a bit wisdom
is in ecology psycho technologies an
ecology of styles that dynamically and
that means reciprocally right in a
reciprocal fashion constrain and
optimize each other such that there is
an overall optimization enhancement of
relevance realization relevance
realization within inference within
insight and into intuition it's like the
connection to implicit processing
internalization understanding gnosis
transformation and aspiration wisdom is
an ecology of psycho technologies and
cognitive styles that dynamically
enhance relevance realization in
inference insight and intuition
internalization understanding and gnosis
transformation and aspiration and that
sense what's happening right is
something that's already overlapping
with the machinery of enlightenment
we're seeing that wisdom is a dynamical
system a dynamical system that is
counteractive to the machinery of
self-deception and that helps to afford
the self organized transformation into
the life of flourishing a life
that is deeply meaningful thank you very
much for your time and attention
[Music]
you
[Music]
you
you
[Music]